---
title: 'Constant Love in *The Winter''s Tale* '
# ---

# ---
author: Richard Burrow
created: '2021-07-25'
date: '2023-07-22'
footer: footer1
layout: layouts/post.njk
plain-title: Constancy in The Winter's Tale
---

Introduction
============

As is his habit, Shakespeare obliquely introduces his overall theme in
the opening scene of *The Winter's Tale*. Archidamus admits that were
Leontes to return Polixenes' visit to Syria, as is expected, the
relative poverty of the hospitality that Bohemia would be able to offer
him could be "justified in \[their\] loves" (1.1.1-16).[^1] Camillo
underlines the significance of this casual remark when he reassures
Archidamus that the "rooted" attachment between the two kings, formed
when "they were train'd together in their childhoods," obviates any need
for Polixenes to repay the "magnificen\[t\]" hospitality which he has
enjoyed in Sicily (1.1.17-24). So assiduously has the two kings' early
"affection" been sustained through a constant

interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies, that they have seem'd
to be together,

> though absent; shook hands, as over a vast; and embrac'd as it were
> from the ends
>
> of oppos'd winds.
>
> (1.1.28-31)

This conversation highlights both the strength of the drive to establish
and maintain intimate attachments and the painstaking, equitable
"interchange" of care that it entails.

The apparently arbitrary introduction of the subject of Leontes' son,
Mamillius, at this point is more pertinent than it seems, for, although
Archidamus claims that nothing "in the world" could ever "alter" the
attachment between the two kings, he knows in reality that love can only
be "continue\[d\]" in some sense after death through the "unspeakable
comfort" of children (1.1.31-35). The prince provides "hope...that,
indeed, physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh," presumably because
he represents a "promise" that their beloved country will flourish after
their own deaths (1.1.35-39). The adoration of Mamillius has almost
become a cult among the older subjects, who are the most aware of their
own mortality: "they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet
their life to see him a man," and in fact would perhaps "be content to
die," were they not sustained by the patriotic hopes which they have
invested in him (1.1.39-42). Camillo qualifies this claim with
characteristic scepticism-- "Yes; if there were no other excuse why they
should desire to live"--but Archidamus refuses to accept that any
passion could act as a substitute for this need to "continue...loves,"
and at the same time makes it clear that the point is essentially a
general one: although Mamillius "is a gallant child," even "if the king
had no son, they would desire to live on crutches till he had one"
(1.1.38-46). The overall implication of this conversation is that the
overriding intensity of parental, or in this case quasi-parental,
devotion is driven by a combination of the instinctive need for constant
attachments and a rational awareness of mortality.

Thus, the opening scene hints that Shakespeare's aim is to explore the
intense desire to form intimate attachments and to "continue" these,
both in life and, as far as possible, posthumously, which expresses
itself both through a painstaking "interchange" of care in friendship
and romantic love, and a deep investment in the "promise" of children.
The main body of this essay is structured around these three types of
attachment, although there is also a section on the broader influence of
attachment, exemplified in the opening scene by the patriotism which so
"physics the subject."

Friendship
==========

Surprisingly, it is the reunion of Leontes and Camillo, rather than that
between the two kings, or even Florizel and Perdita's nascent love,
which best illustrates the true nature of constant attachment
(5.2.10-19).[^2] This friendship was initially triggered by Camillo's
consistent loyalty, which led Leontes to trust him repeatedly "with all
the nearest things to \[his\] heart," after which, "priest-like," the
faithful courtier habitually "cleans'd \[the\] bosom" of the "penitent"
king (1.2.235-39). Ironically, Leontes turns first to Camillo to help
him revenge himself on Polixenes, precisely because he attributes to him
the virtues of wisdom, moderation and courage which both men agree are
the essential requirements for a loyal friend (1.2.242-67; see below for
a fuller analysis of this conversation). Later, in an unexpectedly
extended eulogy--which, at fifteen and a half lines long, completely
dwarfs the one and a half which he spends on his plans to
"reconcile...to" Polixenes and "woo \[the\] queen"--the penitent king
affirms fervently, although not as we shall see entirely accurately,
that his friend possesses precisely these virtues, since his "good mind"
could not be moved to murder Polixenes either by promises or threats,
but rather chose the "hazard" of exile (3.2.155-72). This speech
represents a belated acknowledgement that Leontes' deepest attachment
has always been to Camillo. Camillo has earnt Leontes' special trust
through his thoughtful restraint, which has allowed him to care for his
friend assiduously, without demanding the reciprocal concern which the
king is at first unable to provide.

When summoned from Bohemia by Leontes, Camillo quickly engineers his
return (see below), in order to resume his role as confidant (4.2.6-9).
When the two friends are reunited, Leontes seeks Camillo out first and
exclusively, unlike his other guests, whom he subsequently sees together
(5.2.10-19, 5.2.43-58). The very fact that both men simultaneously and
wordlessly share their horror at the enormity of Leontes' offence
against their friendship is itself enough, not only to remind them of
the depth of their bond, but to deepen it still further:

> They seem'd almost, with staring on one another, to tear the cases of
> their eyes.
>
> There was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture;
> they look'd as
>
> they had heard of a world ransom'd, or one destroy'd. A notable
> passion of wonder
>
> appear'd in them; but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but
> seeing, could
>
> not say if th'importance was joy or sorrow, but in the extremity of
> the one it must
>
> needs be.
>
> (5.2.11-19)

The two men are full of "wonder," presumably at the power of a truly
intimate attachment to endure under the most adverse circumstances.
Guilt and "sorrow" at the loss of his friend, which feels like a
"world...destroy'd," have finally taught Leontes to moderate his proud
self-assertion. The sympathetic connection between the two men, which is
underlined by the first gentleman's repeated use of the third person
plural pronoun, is allowed to flow, untrammelled by any attempt at
self-justification or self-regarding pleas for forgiveness on the part
of the king, or indeed seemingly by any words at all. It is in this way
that Leontes "ransom\[s\]" the attachment which fulfils his deepest
desires.

On his part the wise and moderate Camillo neither reproaches Leontes nor
demands an apology. He knows that this moment of absolute harmony
"justifies" all of Leontes' destructive actions, in Archidamus' phrase,
since it not only promises to satisfy his own "thirst to see" his friend
and yearning to "allay" his "feeling sorrows," but also suggests that
his care might finally be fully reciprocated (1.1.9, 4.4.512-13,
4.2.7-9). Thus, Camillo's humble, diligent, unobtrusively passionate
investment of care, which goes well beyond what Polixenes could have
managed (see below), and which has therefore earnt a much deeper trust
from Leontes, is ultimately rewarded in a way which perhaps exceeds his
wildest dreams. Leontes now assumes the burden of unselfish care which
must inevitably be shouldered by all truly passionate lovers: it is
significant that his final act in the play is to arrange a marriage for
Camillo, rather than to attempt to ingratiate himself with his own
queen.

Whereas Leontes speaks to his other unexpected guests, to "ask Bohemia
forgiveness," to show Perdita how much he regrets his treatment of her
mother, and to thank the shepherd, he simply shares with Camillo a
"speech in dumbness, language in their very gesture," in which the
"changes" observable in the two men are "very notes of admiration" -that
is, exclamation marks, rather than words (5.2.42-58, 5.2.10-14). The two
men are struck "dumb..." at this moment, I would suggest, because they
are experiencing the *summum bonum* of a constant intimacy, which,
precisely because it provides the ultimate standard by which all
endeavours are measured, cannot itself be appraised in any rational way,
but can only be intuited by those who are able to align themselves with
their own deeper nature. The corollary of this point is that Leontes'
comparative eloquence in the presence of Polixenes and Perdita reflects
the relative superficiality of his relationship with his daughter and
his oldest friend. Analysis of the means by which intimacy is
established can be useful, as is demonstrated by the play itself, and by
Camillo and Leontes' earlier discussion of the virtues of a true friend
(1.2.243-64, 1.2.301-02), but speech about love itself is only truly
useful in courtship: Florizel's passionate speeches are motivated by a
yearning to secure the "wave" of constant intimacy, the fulfilment of
which would render them redundant (4.4.140-46).

The first gentleman's "broken delivery" shows that he is indeed one of
those who can appreciate true depth of feeling, whereas the smooth
eloquence of the third gentleman-- evident, ironically, in the
redundancy of his claim that the "encounter...lames report to follow it
and undoes description to do it"--undermines the latter's declaration
that the king's meeting with Polixenes and Perdita is so passionate that
it is "a sight to be seen, cannot be spoken of" (5.2.9, 5.2.56-58,
5.2.42-43). Indeed, we can infer from the third gentleman's initial
concern to establish that his interlocutor did not actually "see the
meeting of the two kings" that his account may even be partly invented,
or at least highly overblown (5.2.39-40). Whereas the first gentleman
describes Leontes and Camillo as simply staring at each other, as if
they are about "to tear the cases of their eyes," the third gentleman
has the two kings "casting up" their eyes and "holding up" their hands
in a much more stylised manner (5.2.46-47). It is possible to infer that
the two reunions get the narrator they deserve: while the less intimate
encounter is rendered still shallower by the third gentleman's
self-important and clichéd additions and exaggerations, the first
gentleman's "broken" account of the violent, but apparently entirely
silent intensity of Leontes' reunion with Camillo stands out as a
sincere attempt to convey in words the inexpressible core of a deep
intimacy.

It is significant that Shakespeare himself has chosen not to dramatize
the reunion of Leontes and Camillo: he uses the perspective of "the
wisest beholder, that knew no more than seeing" to appeal to the
sympathies of those in the audience who retain an intuitive appreciation
of the good, rather than attempting any sort of rational articulation or
appraisal of the emotions which the two men are experiencing
(5.2.15-19). He provides the third gentleman's account, which focuses
mainly on the principal characters in hierarchical order, for those in
his audience who are concentrating primarily on the main story-line,
assuming, with characteristic restraint, that many will not appreciate
the significance of this passionate encounter (5.2.42-56). Nevertheless,
his underlying purpose is to illustrate in its purest form the ultimate
good of a trusting intimacy, which almost all of the characters in the
play are pursuing, whether they know it or not.

Early on in the play, Leontes and Camillo agree that constant friendship
requires moderation, wisdom and courage, since it involves eschewing the
"willful-negligen\[ce\]," "folly" and "fear" respectively of "a gross
lout, a mindless slave, or else a hovering temporizer" (1.2.243-64,
1.2.301-02). The unexpectedly precise way in which the point is made,
and then reiterated fifty lines later, offers a characteristically
veiled hint that the play's analysis of constant attachments is
structured around these three cardinal virtues and their corresponding
vices. Camillo, Paulina and Hermione are used to explore the roles
played by wisdom, courage and moderation in creating the just exchange
of self-denying care that can deliver a constant intimacy. The first two
also exemplify "fear" and "folly" respectively, while Leontes himself
embodies the "willful-negligen\[ce\]" of a "gross lout." The fourth of
the cardinal virtues, justice, which is the overall product of the other
three, is fully represented in the play only in the reunion between
Camillo and Leontes and in the romance between Florizel and Perdita,
where there is a precisely equitable exchange of sympathetic concern.
Since the enduring element of romantic love is intimate friendship
rather than physical desire, we shall see that many of the following
points apply equally to committed sexual relationships (see below).

Camillo presents his thoughtful ability to "weigh...well the end," which
he implicitly identifies as his intimacy with Leontes, as underpinning
all the other virtues, since it has enabled him to restrain potentially
divisive desires and fears (1.2.250-62). His distinctive prudence is
shown by the fact that his efforts to prevent Leontes from
"reiterat\[ing\]" his "dangerous" fantasies are from the start as
vehement as his defence of Hermione (1.2.279-84, 1.2.296-98). After
recognising relatively quickly the futility of further argument, he
surprisingly considers actually committing the murder that the king is
proposing, but only on the condition that Leontes would "give no blemish
to \[Hermione's\] honor, none," not only for her sake and that of her
son, whom, as the opening scene implies, Camillo also loves deeply, but
also for the sake of the country as a whole, which might otherwise be
exposed to "the injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms known and
allied" to Sicily (1.2.333-41). Although Camillo soon breaks this
informal contract, the very fact that he toys with the idea of murder
demonstrates, albeit in a highly unorthodox manner, that he does indeed
"weigh...well" both "the end" and the means by which it may be achieved:
killing Polixenes "with no rash potion, but with a ling'ring dram that
should not work maliciously like poison," would have enabled him to
protect all his beloveds at once, as well as the country to which he is
so clearly devoted (1.2.319-21; see also 4.4.666-67).

At the same time, Camillo's momentary impulse to murder Polixenes
confirms that he is passionate as well as thoughtful. Like the young
lovers, who put the shepherd's life in such danger (4.4.420-22,
5.1.198-202),[^3] the prudent and restrained Camillo is for a moment
tempted to allow his devotion to his queen and country to override all
other duties and ties, as he seriously contemplates murdering a man to
whom he has acted as cupbearer for nine months, and whom he evidently
respects as a loyal friend to the king (1.2.345, 1.1.21-32). Thus,
Shakespeare suggests that constant attachments, in this case in the form
of friendship and patriotism, naturally override codes of honour and
nobility.

However, Camillo eventually abandons queen, prince and country to their
fate, not, apparently, deterred primarily by the enormity of the crime
which he is contemplating--although he claims parenthetically that he
would "not do't" either way--but by the prudent reflection that there is
no "example" of anyone who has "flourish'd after" killing a king
(1.2.356-63). Fearing that "to do't, or no, is certain...a break-neck,"
since either way he would know too much about Leontes' turpitude to be
allowed to survive, he decides to flee, rather than making any attempt
to protect Hermione, whether by murdering Polixenes, or in any other
way: "O miserable lady! But for me, what case stand I in..."
(1.2.362-63, 1.2.351-52). It is probable also that a doubt as to whether
Leontes would keep his promise to spare Hermione plays a part in
Camillo's decision not to commit the murder, since he admits from the
start that he can be "fearful to do a thing, where \[he\] the issue
doubted," even when he is sufficiently convinced of the need to act for
"the execution \[to\] cry out against the non-performance" (1.2.258-62).

Although Camillo's abrupt flight is of course a perfectly understandable
response to the enormous pressures to which he is being subjected, it
nevertheless demonstrates that his attachments are in the end not quite
strong enough to override his instinct for self-preservation. It is
significant that in the exploration of the virtues conducive to
friendship discussed above, Camillo expresses a confidence that he
generally avoids "folly" and "willful-negligen\[ce\]," but admits that
"fear...oft infects the wisest": we can infer that moderation comes much
more naturally than courage to those of a prudent temperament
(1.2.254-64). The contrast between Camillo's flight and the absolutely
courageous constancy displayed by Florizel, Perdita and Paulina
highlights the limitations of the former's prudent temperament. Unlike
the lovers, who are prepared to elope unaided, albeit as a last resort,
Camillo not only prioritises his own survival over his attachment to
queen, prince and country, but also takes care to establish that
Polixenes is grateful enough to offer him service in Bohemia before
making his escape (1.2.439-41, 1.2.460-62, 4.4.498-504). Thus, the
suggestion is that prudent temperaments tend to baulk at the dangers
which deep attachments may entail, presumably because they can
anticipate them with peculiar clarity (4.4.565-72).

As he grows older in self-imposed exile, however, Camillo realises that
his prudence cannot moderate his deepest desires. It is clear that he
has led an unfulfilled life in Bohemia, despite having thrived under
Polixenes in worldly terms, for, like the shepherd, who wishes above all
to be buried with his father's "honest bones," he is driven by a
compelling "desire to lay \[his\] bones" in the place where he was born,
and has a "woman's longing" for "dear Sicilia" (4.2.4-20, 4.4.455-56,
4.4.511, 4.4.665-67). Above all, Camillo has finally been "sent for" by
the "penitent King," whom he still humbly thinks of as his "master," and
whom he now "thirst\[s\] to see," since he longs once again to be in a
position to "cleans\[e his\] bosom" of his "feeling sorrows" (4.2.6-9,
4.4.512-13, 1.2.238). His unconditional forgiveness of Leontes is
contrasted with the ongoing vexation of the less passionate Polixenes,
who has determined to "speak no more" about him, and in fact only sees
his oldest friend again because of his angry pursuit of Florizel
(4.2.20-23).

Despite his innate shrewdness, Camillo is therefore a deeply unworldly
and genuinely passionate character. Driven as he is by love for Leontes,
he is completely unmoved either by Polixenes' hints that he might offer
him financial rewards to stay in Bohemia-- "heaping friendships"--or by
his flattering assurances that he is vitally important to Bohemian
politics (4.2.10-20). The contrast between the passionate Camillo and
the courtly Polixenes is highlighted when the former praises the "sound
affection" which leads Florizel to swear to value power, beauty and
knowledge purely as the means to deepen his love for Perdita, while the
less passionate and more status-conscious king merely comments
grudgingly that his son's heartfelt devotion is "fairly offer'd"
(4.4.370-79). Whereas Leontes trusted Camillo "with all the nearest
things to \[his\] heart," offering him worldly rewards purely out of
love (1.2.235-39, 1.2.313-14; although see 1.2.309-11), Polixenes'
response to his request to be allowed to return home shows that the
king's priorities are, characteristically, primarily political; in fact,
he shows as little sympathetic concern for Camillo as Leontes showed
when responding to Polixenes' own similar wish earlier in the play
(4.2.1-21, 1.2.1-19).[^4]

Camillo's shrewdness remains a formidable force, but it is now entirely
focused on providing the means by which he can resume his life in Sicily
with Leontes. He does not openly oppose Polixenes' insistence that he
stay in Bohemia, but manages to engineer his own repatriation without
risking the king's wrath, simply by encouraging Florizel to go to Sicily
and then informing his father of his plans in the hope that he will
pursue them there (4.2.4-33, 4.4.466-72, 4.4.508-13, 4.4.662-66). This
plan is as wily as the one which allowed him to escape from Sicily in
the first place, since he "betray\[s\]" Florizel, who has hitherto
trusted that his "honesty...endur'd all weathers," and tricks both the
kings with as little compunction as he deceived Leontes at the start of
the play (5.1.193-95). Although this second voyage is different in that
it also allows him to secure "love and honor" for the prince, to whom he
shows considerable generosity, and for whom he clearly feels
considerable affection, Camillo is nevertheless prepared to sacrifice
his lesser ties if necessary, as he was when contemplating murder, since
he knows that there is no vantage point higher than the passion of
lovers from which these unscrupulous tactics could be condemned: it
should not be forgotten that from Camillo's perspective, Leontes could
easily have taken Polixenes' side once he understood that Perdita was a
commoner (4.4.510, 4.4.585-94). All in all, Camillo's thoughtfulness
allows him pursue his deep attachments without the encumbrance of
artificial conceptions of nobility.

Camillo's underlying nature remains deeply erotic, despite the fact that
his prudence can occasionally degenerate into fearfulness. His name,
which means 'acolyte,' might imply that he is in the process of learning
the mysteries of constant love as the play goes on. He actually admires
Perdita for countering his own argument that love is "alter\[ed\]" by
"affliction" with the assertion that troubles may "subdue the cheek, but
not take in the mind," acknowledging that he could learn a great deal
from her stalwart passion: "she seems a mistress to most that teach"
(4.4.572-83). After the "wonder" of his reunion with Leontes, he is less
sceptical about the power of love to endure, for even as he urges the
king to allow time to "blow away" his sorrows, as it does almost all
passions, he tacitly excepts truly constant attachments from this rule:
joys which last may be "scarce," but he now concedes that they do
nevertheless exist (5.3.49-53). It is hard, although not quite
impossible, to imagine him leaving Sicily again at the end of the play,
even if he were in great personal danger, for experience has taught him
that a loveless life is not worth living. Camillo's wisest act may be to
marry the staunchly constant Paulina, whom he has apparently always
admired, since she is likely to ensure that his characteristic prudence
will never again lapse into expediency (5.3.141-43). Such a lapse would
otherwise, however, remain a perpetual possibility, since temperaments
such as Camillo's are innately fearful.

Paulina shows precisely the courageous determination which Camillo
lacks, when, defying his threat to have her "burnt," she insists that
Leontes' treatment of the queen "savors of tyranny" (2.3.114-23). Before
boldly fabricating Hermione's death, she confronts Leontes with the
destruction which he has caused in a characteristically assertive
manner, daring him to retaliate by "tortur\[ing\]" her (3.2.175-214). It
is the intensity of her love for the queen, "the sweet'st, dear'st
creature...," which allows her to defy Leontes in this way, while his
less passionate courtiers "creep like shadows" around him (3.2.201,
3.2.228, 2.3.34).[^5] As well as herself caring for the queen in a
"remov'd house," and visiting her "twice or thrice a day" for sixteen
years, she constantly demands that the king and his courtiers remain
devoted to her memory (5.2.104-07, 5.1.23-84, 5.1.94-106, 5.1.224-27).
Shakespeare shows the power of her staunch constancy to generate
trusting relationships: the jailer is easily persuaded to let her have
the infant Perdita because he knows that Paulina is "a worthy lady," who
will "stand betwixt \[him\] and danger;" Emilia respects her deeply;
Antigonus gives her "the rein" to rebuke Leontes because "she'll not
stumble;" Hermione presumably relies on her entirely for sixteen years;
Leontes comes to depend on her "worth and honesty;" while the
discriminating Camillo seems always to have admired her (2.2.4-18,
2.2.63-64, 2.2.40-44, 2.3.50-52, 5.1.81-82, 5.3.141-46).

However, Paulina fails to see that her insistent attempts to "soften"
Leontes' heart "at the sight o' th' child" might be counterproductive:
indeed, since he has made no effort to see the baby, and his initial
reaction is simply to demand that she be taken away, we may infer that
it is precisely this insistence which eventually provokes the king into
exposing Perdita (2.2.35-40, 2.3.74-183).[^6] Paulina has no further
strategy once her "true" words turn out not to be "medicinal" in the way
that she had hoped (2.3.36-39). Her plan to conceal Hermione
permanently--as she must presume--arguably shows a similar strategic
naivety, since it involves attempting to prevent the king from
remarrying, even though "dangers, by his Highness' fail of issue, may
drop upon his kingdom," thus indirectly threatening all that she loves
(5.1.27-29). There is therefore an unintentional irony in her remark
that she is sure to "do good" if "wit flow from \[her tongue\] as
boldness from \[her\] bosom," for her "wit," although by no means
inconsiderable, is thoroughly overshadowed by her "boldness"
(2.2.50-52). Her very passion leads her to adopt direct methods which
are often highly imprudent.

By contrast, we have seen that the prudent Camillo quickly sees the
futility of opposing Leontes' rage (1.2.279-350). Camillo, who, as
Polixenes confirms, is a shrewd politician, would disagree with Emilia's
view that "goodness" such as Paulina's "cannot miss a thriving issue,"
since he knows that indirect or unscrupulous tactics are often
necessary, even if one's aims are benevolent: it is significant that his
deception of Florizel allows him to secure the young lovers "love and
honor," even as he satisfies his own desire to return home, whereas
Paulina's direct and noble assault on Leontes could easily have led to
Perdita's death as well as her own (4.2.10-17, 2.2.40-44, 4.4.508-13).
However, we have seen that Camillo's prudence can collapse into simple
fearfulness (albeit only under extreme pressure): whereas he abandons
both his country and Hermione, despite understanding fully their
"dangerous" and "miserable" position, Paulina risks her life to defend
the queen and then gives her refuge for sixteen years (1.2.296-98,
1.2.351). Paulina and Camillo's engagement can therefore be taken as an
indication that, just as their shortcomings are contrasting--one tends
towards "folly" and the other to "fear"--so their virtues are
complementary: thus, the suggestion is that prudence and courage need to
be combined in an ongoing dialectic (5.3.141-46).

Quite apart from her lack of prudence, Paulina refuses to acknowledge
that passionate constancy itself has its natural limits. Her own love
for the queen naturally continues undimmed, since she is actually seeing
her two or three times a day, but Leontes is ready to remarry after
sixteen years of grief and guilt, as his desire for Perdita suggests
(5.2.104-07, 5.1.95-103, 5.1.224-27). Paulina's reminders that Leontes
has in effect "kill'd" a "perfect woman" and a "jewel of children"
extend the penitent king's guilt and sorrow to a point where they seem
likely to "unfurnish \[him\] of reason": one courtier tells her that she
could have said "a thousand things that would have done the time more
benefit, and grac'd \[her\] kindness better" (5.1.12-23,
5.1.115-23).[^7] The fact that she attempts to persuade courtiers as
well as the king to retain their love of the queen confirms that these
reminders are inspired by her own continuing adoration of
Hermione--there is "none \[so\] worthy"--rather than simply by a worry
that Leontes might end up unconsciously committing bigamy (5.1.94-106,
5.1.34-35).

Paulina argues that a second marriage would "to the heavens be
contrary"--as did her namesake, St. Paul--for Apollo has proclaimed that
the king "shall not have an heir till his lost child be found," and
plays on Leontes' piety further by conjuring up a fearful vision of
Hermione's ghost shrieking "Remember mine" in protest if he were ever to
remarry (1 Corinthians vii, 5.1.34-71). These words seem to echo the
invocation of the ghost in *Hamlet*, which shocks the prince of Denmark
into what I have argued elsewhere is an imprudent and unnaturally
prolonged allegiance to his father's memory.[^8] Like the ghost, the
spirited Paulina assumes that it is shameful as well as impious to allow
love to "ebb..." after the loss of a beloved (5.1.95-105). However, the
very fact that she has to turn to conventional codes of piety and honour
in an effort to sustain Leontes' and the unknown courtier's devotion to
Hermione in all its original intensity is itself evidence that this
intensity will naturally soften somewhat after a bereavement, even if
grief never fully fades. The noble steadfastness that Paulina strives to
instil artificially in Leontes and the courtier is thus very different
from Florizel's brave resolve to devote himself to Perdita come what
may, which stems from an entirely natural desire to ensure that his
current joy will continue indefinitely, like "a wave o' th' sea"
(4.4.140-42).

One cannot, therefore, dismiss Camillo's opinion that mourning which is
"too sore laid on" should be left to "kill...itself" (5.3.49-53).
Indeed, Paulina's tacit willingness to marry Camillo, despite having
just declared that she will spend the rest of her life "lament\[ing\]"
her "mate (that's never to be found again)," like "an old turtle,"
indicates that her own effort to maintain absolute loyalty is ultimately
unsustainable after a bereavement (5.3.132-46). Perhaps she understands
in the end that such an effort must be driven by artificial principles
of nobility and piety, since it is no longer being sustained naturally,
by a delightful interchange of constant devotion. Her engagement to
Camillo may suggest that prudent thought is more consistently useful to
stalwart lovers than the piety which Antigonus embodies (see below),
despite the occasional tendency for such prudence to degenerate into
mere expediency. In sum; just as Paulina's steadfastness will no doubt
continually remind Camillo that affliction cannot "take in the mind," so
the shrewd and sceptical Camillo provides the antidote to Paulina's
tendency to extend her spirited loyalty beyond its natural limits, or to
exercise it in a manner that is virtuous rather than productive.

Just as Camillo and Paulina are used to explore wisdom and courage
respectively, so the relationships between Polixenes, Leontes and
Hermione are designed to illustrate the role played by moderation and
its corresponding vice, "willful-negligen\[ce\]," in constant
friendships (1.2.254-56). The courtly Polixenes' repeated attempts to
soothe Leontes' disappointment at his decision to return home bears out
the implication of the opening scene that the king is prepared to exert
himself in order to "justif\[y\] in \[his\] loves" Leontes' lavish
hospitality (1.1.8-31). Aware that mere expressions of gratitude will
not be sufficient to mollify his more passionate friend, he uses a
variety of strategies to excuse his departure, assuring the king that he
would stay longer "were there necessity in \[his\] request;"
highlighting the "charge and trouble" which his visit has caused; and
claiming that his return is motivated by pressing "fears of what may
chance or breed upon \[his\] absence," even though messengers have
recently reported that "all in Bohemia's well" (1.2.1-33). These tactful
remarks, when taken alongside his eventual decision to extend his
already lengthy stay in Sicily by a week, demonstrate that Polixenes
entirely understands that constant friends must strive to soften the
impact of potentially divisive desires, lest they disrupt the exchange
of sympathetic care which sustains the friendship (1.2.38-59).

However, Polixenes' eventual concession is a minor one, while his
tactful words cost him nothing. His attempt to shoulder some of his
friend's guilt at the end of the play may be dismissed as nothing more
than a decorous gesture, just as his easy rapprochement with Leontes may
remind us that he has less invested in the relationship than characters
like Camillo and Hermione, whose whole "world" has been "destroy'd" by
the king's actions (5.3.53-56; 5.2.43-52, 5.2.14-15). In fact, Polixenes
substitutes a superficial courtliness for the humble care which truly
passionate attachments demand. He is by no means completely passionless,
as his affectionate relationship with Florizel shows, but compared to
Leontes he is relatively unerotic, as the queen perhaps implies when she
assumes that her husband was "the verier wag o' th' two" friends when
they were children (1.2.65-66).

If, as the above argument suggests, the level of self-denial shown by
friends tends to be commensurate with the intensity of their attachment,
then Leontes is clearly the exception, at least in the first half of the
play, since the king is simultaneously more passionate than his friend
and much less moderate. Leontes fails to persuade Polixenes to stay
because his proud self-love leaves him with no strategy other than to
issue peremptory demands, which he insists there is "no gainsaying":
"Stay your thanks a while, and pay them when you part" (1.2.9-19). His
direct and unrestrained assertion of desire is bound to be divisive, as
we can see when Polixenes' resentfully compares his friend's tyrannical
approach to a "whip" (1.2.23-25). Overall, Leontes' spirited
self-assertiveness leads him to resist the paradoxical process which
Florizel's courtship exemplifies, by which the desire to possess the
beloved for oneself, which is the foundation of all passionate
attachments, is naturally sublimated into humble self-denial and loyal
care, once it is understood that this is the only way to establish the
sympathetic union which is in fact the deepest and most enduring form of
possession.

By contrast, Hermione's pleas succeed precisely because of her restraint
and sympathetic care. She indirectly conveys her appreciation of the
strength of Polixenes' paternal devotion (see below) through her
insistence that she would "thwack him hence" if he were to confess that
his true motive for returning home was that "he longs to see his son"
(1.2.34-37). She is able to pretend to ignore this longing because of
Polixenes' gruff reticence, but she gracefully disarms him, not only by
her implicit acknowledgement of her own sly tactic and her insight into
his motivation, expressed with such tactful indirectness, but also by
her implication that she is requesting a fairly minimal extension
precisely because she does not wish to ride roughshod over his paternal
feelings: "Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure the borrow of a
week" (1.2.38-39). She manages to make the same point as Leontes about
the inadequacy of Polixenes' "thanks"--indeed, at one point almost in
the same words--but in a gentler, more bantering manner, calculated to
appeal to the king's own conscience, while at the same time defusing the
tension which her husband's more domineering approach has created by
playfully threatening to keep him "as a prisoner, not like a guest"
(1.2.51-56; compare 1.2.9-10).

Unlike the comparatively bland Polixenes on the one hand and the
intensely demanding Leontes on the other, Hermione combines moderation
with intense passion: her tactful pleas are motivated mainly by a
desperate desire to win Leontes' praise (1.2.90-101), but also partly by
a real affection for Polixenes, which is evident in her unexpectedly
passionate insistence that she would "thwack" him hence immediately, if
he were to confess to a longing to see his son.[^9] Her promise to
encourage her husband to extend his proposed return visit by a month,
which would more than requite Polixenes for agreeing to stay for another
week, illustrates her capacity for self-denial, since, as she declares
with humble understatement, she loves Leontes "not a jar o' th' clock
behind what lady she her lord" (1.2.39-44, see also 1.1.5-7). Polixenes
succumbs to her persuasion almost immediately because he recognises that
it would be churlish to assert his own desires too forcefully in
response to such an onslaught of graceful charm (1.2.56-59). Thus,
Hermione engages as gracefully as Florizel in the complex negotiations
which intimate attachments inevitably demand, fostering trust and
gratitude by ensuring that any expression of need is balanced by
demonstrations of sympathetic concern. The contrast between Hermione and
Leontes underlines the fact that the latter is too proud to accept that
the constant intimacy for which he longs can only be achieved by
restraining his own desires and pride, while focusing instead on caring
diligently for his beloveds.

Even leaving aside the fact that he has no evidence for his suspicions,
Leontes' relationship with the queen seems too cool to spark his jealous
rage. At the same time, he surely could not have gained the affection of
Camillo as well as Polixenes if he were habitually given to such
arbitrary outbursts (1.2.235-39, 1.2.324, 4.2.6-9, 4.4.512-13, 1.2.238).
As Leontes himself points out, Paulina would not dare to suggest that he
was a tyrant if he actually were one (2.3.116-24).[^10] I would argue
that his jealousy is in fact focused on Polixenes: his priorities can be
deduced from the fact that he only belatedly modifies his claim that
Hermione "never spoke... to better purpose" than when persuading his
friend to extend his stay, after her query has prompted him to except
the moment when she agreed to marry him (1.2.88-105). Whereas he courted
his wife merely for "three crabbed months," his "interchange" with
Polixenes has been sustained diligently since childhood (1.2.101-05,
1.1.22-32). His apparently casual remark, "At my request he would not
\[stay\]," marks the moment when he suddenly suspects that his
friendship is not fully reciprocated, deducing, with some justification
as we have seen, that Hermione's successful persuasion of Polixenes is a
sign that she has developed a deeper intimacy with his friend than he
himself has ever managed to do (1.2.87). The misleading casualness of
this aside is in fact a sign of his determination to repress this
insight, which he finds unbearably humiliating.

This interpretation is borne out by the fact that it is Polixenes whom
the king initially tries to poison, whereas his original aim is
apparently to spare the queen with "no blemish to her honor, none"
(1.2.312-41). Only when it becomes evident that "the harlot king is
quite beyond \[his\] arm...plot-proof" does he begin to wonder whether,
if Hermione "were gone...a moi'ty of my rest might come to me again"
-thus implying that he might actually have kept his promise to Camillo
spare her, which he claims at the time only formalises the "course"
already "set down" in his own mind (2.3.1-9, 1.2.339-41). It is the
"thought of him" that disrupts Leontes' peace, while punishing his wife
is a secondary consideration (which is not to deny that some of his
jealous spite is reserved for her, as the object of his friend's
apparently fickle affection): "For present vengeance, take it on her"
(2.3.18-23). It should be no surprise that there is "a jealousy of
friendship, as well as of love," as one astute critic claims, for
Shakespeare habitually presents friendship as rivalling romantic and
parental devotion in its power to generate deep and enduring
attachments.[^11]

Since Leontes resembles the lion after which he is named in his fierce
pride and concentration on his own gratification, his response to his
sudden realisation that he is less intimate with Polixenes than he had
thought--a frustration which is, as we have seen, itself an inevitable
consequence of his arrogant approach to relationships--is not to strive
humbly and diligently to become a better friend, but to search for an
external cause for the king's fickleness. The invention of the
adulterous affair not only provides such a cause, but goes some way
towards justifying the vindictive rage by which he attempts to relieve
his humiliating sense of exclusion. Leontes can only avoid acknowledging
his intense frustration at his failure to achieve the same level of
intimacy with Polixenes as Hermione by displacing his pain in the most
disruptive manner possible.[^12] It is a measure both of the intensity
of this pain and, ironically, the intransigence of his self-love that
the fantasy by which he hopes finally to find "rest" eventually involves
not only destroying or attempting to destroy all those to whom he is
closely attached, but also "disgrac\[ing\]" and tormenting himself with
"goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps" (2.3.1-2, 2.3.8-9, 1.2.187-90,
1.2.325-33).

To sum up on the play's exploration of friendship: passionate friends
have an intuitive appreciation that the ultimate good is a perfectly
harmonious, constant intimacy, which naturally leads to a thoughtful
effort to control potentially divisive desires and fears. Thus,
enduring, intimate friendships are founded on moderation, wisdom and
courage. The contrast between Hermione's and Leontes' approach to their
relationships illustrates Shakespeare's teaching that an intense desire
to unite with a beloved forever can only be fulfilled by humbly
moderating any direct assertion of this desire and focusing instead on
establishing trust through sympathetic care. It is therefore an absolute
priority for passionate friends to restrain their pride, since it is
this that is likely to prevent them from engaging in this paradoxical
process. At the same time, courage and thoughtfulness need to be
carefully balanced: thought underpins the moderation of intimate
friends, and helps them to pursue their attachment prudently and without
regard for conventional morality, but it may easily collapse into fickle
pusillanimity, whereas stalwart constancy, although one of the key
attributes of a loyal friend, is not necessarily pragmatic or even
ultimately, in the long aftermath of a bereavement, emotionally
sustainable. All these points apply equally to romantic love, the
enduring element of which is trusting intimacy, although we shall see
that the initial intensity of sexual desire generates a unique set of
problems and opportunities.

Romantic Love
=============

The young lovers provide the benchmark by which the other romantic
relationships in the play can be judged. Florizel's name suggests that
he embodies the qualities traditionally represented by the spring
flowers that Perdita wishes to give him: these comprise daffodils,
violets, primroses, oxlips, the "fleur de lis" and "the crown imperial,"
or fritillaria, which symbolise respectively hope, faithfulness,
virginal innocence, "bold\[ness\]," chastity and perpetual devotion, the
latter of which is, I would argue, the overall goal, or 'crowning'
achievement, that is facilitated by these virtues (4.4.118-29).[^13]
This list indicates that even the intense, but potentially fleeting
sensuality of young adulthood, which is the only element in romantic
love that distinguishes it from intimate friendship, may well express
itself--perfectly naturally, as the floral imagery which pervades the
conversation implies--as a constant, self-denying devotion, which
regulates both desire and fear. This is because many young lovers can
recognise that faithful devotion--as represented by violets--although
relatively "dim," may, when fully reciprocated, be "sweeter" than
immediate physical desire, symbolised here by "the lids of Juno's eyes,
or Cytherea's breath" (4.4.120-22). Perdita's own chaste fidelity
illustrates this point, although at the same time her reference to
Proserpina's rape, her own longing to have Florizel "quick and in mine
arms" and her mistaken assumption that Mopsa and Dorcas are virgins all
serve to remind us of the almost ungovernable intensity of sexual desire
(4.4.109-32).

Whereas Shakespeare assigns wisdom, moderation and courage to particular
characters in his study of friendship, he ensures that the young lovers
combine all four of the cardinal virtues. The romance is founded on
justice and wisdom, which are the overarching virtues of the four.
Florizel's apparently self-effacing willingness to renounce his right to
succeed to the throne in order to marry Perdita actually forms part of a
perfectly just, or equitable, erotic transaction: the price of this
enduring intimacy is high, nothing less than constant care, but the
reward is the ultimate good of Perdita's commensurate trust and fidelity
- "there is not half a kiss to choose who loves another best"
(4.4.31-51, 4.4.175-76). "I' th' virtue of \[his\] daughter" the
shepherd can offer Florizel "a portion equal" to the prince's own
extraordinary prospective wealth, for, as in the case of the two kings,
material inequalities between lovers may be "justified in \[their\]
loves" (4.4.383-89, 1.1.9). Indeed, Florizel has to make a much deeper
and more self-denying investment in his courtship than less passionate
characters like the clown or Polixenes, who buy their mistresses
"knacks" and "silken treasury" simply in order to secure a "happy
holding" (4.4.309-23, 4.4.347-56). Just as Polixenes can easily deprive
his wife of his presence for nine months, since he sees his marriage
merely as a way of satisfying his "stronger blood"--the sensitive
Hermione does not even consider the possibility that it is marital
devotion which has triggered the king's determination to return home
(1.2.71-75, 1.2.34-37)--so he is entranced primarily by Perdita's
dancing rather than, by the combination of her dancing, singing and
conversation, as are Florizel, and, no doubt, the shepherd, who delights
in her ability to do "anything" equally skilfully (4.4.176-77, compare
4.4.57-58, 4.4.136-43).

Although attachment is an absolutely fundamental instinct, which is by
no means even exclusively a human preserve,[^14] in rational beings it
is refined by an understanding of what is required to secure a lasting
intimacy. Although Florizel is seemingly "advis'd" purely by "fancy" in
choosing to be "heir to \[his\] affection" rather than the conventional
crown which he would otherwise inherit, his assertion that "reason"
might also "thereto be obedient" hints that his apparently "desperate"
determination not to "violat\[e\]...\[his\] faith" could actually be
seen as prudent from the largest perspective, since he knows that he
must strive at every turn to prove his loyalty to his passionate, but
understandably distrustful, mistress (4.4.482-85). Unlike Paulina,
however, he combines this insight with a pragmatic evaluation of the
means by which the ultimate good can best be achieved: although he is
ready simply to seek his own fortune as a last resort, he is under no
illusions as to the dangers of such a course, as is shown by his
willingness to adopt Camillo's devious plan (4.4.520-94).

Nevertheless, Florizel is without doubt courageous, as well as just and
wise, since he would have abandoned the comforts of court in order to
elope with Perdita, leaving himself with no means of support
(4.4.462-504). Quite apart from such extreme sacrifices, Autolycus
provides a glimpse of the stalwart, humdrum self-denial which constant
love necessarily entails, when he reports ruefully that he was unable to
raise the subject of the shepherd's bundle on the voyage to Sicily
because the "overfond" prince was focusing entirely on caring for the
"much sea-sick" Perdita, even though he was "himself little better"
(5.2.114-20).

Florizel is also moderate, or, more accurately, he subordinates all his
other desires to his intransigent passion:

> ...were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
>
> Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
>
> That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
>
> More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
>
> Without her love; for her, employ them all,
>
> Commend them and condemn them to her service,
>
> Or to their own perdition.
>
> (4.4.372-78)

Florizel's pride, curiosity and physical attraction--a list which
perhaps dimly echoes the classical tripartite division of the soul, as
seen most famously in Plato's *Republic*--are all regulated by a desire
to win Perdita's trust. In particular, his sexual desire does not "burn
hotter than \[his\] faith" (4.4.34-35). As we have seen, Florizel
admires his beloved's conversation, her singing and her dancing equally,
which suggests that the beauty of her intellect, passionate spirit and
body have merged together seamlessly in his mind (4.4.136-46). The
potentially transient sexual element in this attraction--which, both
here and elsewhere in the scene, is symbolised by dancing--is
subordinated to an ongoing reverence for the "singular" majesty of her
character, "that crowns what \[she is\] doing in the present deeds" and
makes him wish that she "might ever do nothing but" dance, as "a wave o'
th' sea" might roll on indefinitely (4.4.140-46). Thus overall,
Shakespeare suggests that the cardinal virtues are ultimately derived
from the austere imperatives of love: Florizel's clear-sighted decision
to devote every effort to earning a constant intimacy with Perdita
through disciplined care drives him to control any potentially divisive
desire or fear.

Perdita is courageous because her desire for the supreme prize of
Florizel's love overshadows even her intense fear of Polixenes
(4.4.16-24). After Polixenes' intervention, she declares that she would
not have been too "much afear'd" to tell him that "the self-same sun
that shines upon \[his\] court hides not his visage from our cottage,"
but implies that she was distracted from the king's threats by the much
more fearful prospect of losing her beloved (4.4.434-50). This remark
shows that Perdita's courageous pursuit of the *summum bonum* is
supported by her thoughtful ability to make the distinction between
nature and convention, which was integral to philosophy as it was
classically understood.[^15]

As we have seen, Camillo praises the wisdom of her remark that
"affliction may subdue the cheek, but not take in the mind," presumably
because it reinforces his own growing sense that the potential rewards
of love justify any outlay of steadfast fortitude (4.4.575-79). He sees
that Perdita's willingness to risk execution, or at the very least a
life of penury, as it must seem, by eloping with her beloved is
underpinned by her understanding that love must be earnt (4.4.420-504).

Perdita's moderation also stems from an instinctive fear of losing
Florizel, which is reinforced by prudent thought: she reproaches herself
hastily for allowing the prince to tease her into comparing him to "a
bank, for love to lie and play on," for she knows that her beloved may
well have "woo'd \[her\] the false way," or will not in the end be able
to bring himself to renounce his birth-right (4.4.127-34, 4.4.146-51,
4.4.35-40, 4.4.446-50). Perdita knows that sexual desire can distract
lovers from their underlying needs, while offering only ephemeral
rewards in return. She draws on the distinction between nature and
convention to suggest that a primarily physical passion may only ever be
sustained by artificial means: she compares the "art" designed to "mend
nature" that "nature" itself originally "makes," which is what enables
the grafted "gillyvors," or carnations--significantly, their latter name
is derived from their flesh-like colour--to remain "the fairest flowers
o' th' season" even as "the year grow\[s\] ancient," to the use of
ingenious aids to stimulate and prolong physical attraction, declaring
that she would not wish Florizel to "desire to breed by \[her\]" simply
because she was "painted" (4.4.79-103). Thus, Perdita understands that
immoderate lovers may dissipate their energies in an engrossing effort
to prolong sensual pleasure through artificial stimulation, which is yet
bound to be frustrated in the end: ultimately, even the grafted
carnations will be destroyed by winter.

Perdita's passionate attachment and thoughtful ability to align herself
absolutely with her deepest needs regulate not only her sensuality, but
her pride. She reproaches herself for self-love as well as sensuality
after fantasising about "play\[ing\] on" Florizel, declaring that "with
wisdom \[she\] might fear" that his "praises are too large": thus, her
worry that "this robe of mine does change my disposition" reflects her
understanding that vanity--that is, the pleasure of being admired by any
lover, let alone a prince--may often work hand in hand with physical
desire to distract lovers from their underlying need for constant
intimacy (4.4.130-51). The "piedness," or variegated colour, of the
carnations hints at the way in which this combination of pride and
unrestrained sensuality can be grafted on to attachments, as it were,
thus distorting their underlying nature: of course both these more
ephemeral motives are, like the carnations, rooted in nature, but both
have to be weeded out with care, since they culminate in artificial,
"painted" displays, which provide no substantial fulfilment. Perdita's
prudent restraint forces Florizel to realise that there is no point in
buying her "silken treasury" in the way that Polixenes suggests, since
"she prizes not such trifles," but only the "gifts \[which\] are pack'd
and lock'd up in my heart": the queenly outfit which he has bought
Perdita is not designed to flatter her, or to increase her beauty, but
to symbolise his decision to enthrone her as his ultimate, or 'crowning'
good (4.4.347-60, 4.4.1-14).

By contrast, Mopsa and Dorcas, who are less prudent and restrained, use
artificial aids to beauty, exemplified by the trinkets which Autolycus
peddles, in a sort of escalating arms race, which bolsters their vanity
and prolongs their own sexual pleasure, but, as Autolycus's third ballad
implies, leaves them without the security of an enduring commitment:
their part in the song is to beg the clown repeatedly, but
ineffectually, to reveal his plans (4.4.218-50, 4.4.297-308). The
clown's recent jilting of Dorcas confirms that the shepherdesses'
immoderate sensuality is likely to be counterproductive in the end, for,
in contrast with Florizel, the stimulation which their lover is pursuing
is as fleeting as his material outlay is nugatory: "being enthrall'd as
I am, it will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves"
(4.4.231-41). The shepherdesses thus practise an art designed to "mend
nature" which "nature makes": by grafting a garish display, inspired by
pride and sexual desire, onto their underlying attachment, they have in
fact reduced their chances of securing the lasting commitment which they
most of all desire, since sensual pleasure will fade in the end, however
skilfully it is prolonged (4.4.81-97).

Autolycus' first ballad implies that worries such as Perdita's can only
be avoided by those who totally lack passion: the "usurer's wife,"--the
song's main protagonist--whose marriage was presumably purely
prudential, and who longs to eat only cold-blooded creatures, "adders'
heads, and toads carbonado'd" when she is in labour, produces only
"money-bags," indicating that she is concerned entirely with
self-advancement (4.4.262-65). The other two ballads outline the dilemma
which male inconstancy poses for more passionate women, who hope to form
warm attachments, and to nurture children who will "continue their
loves," rather than merely generating "money-bags" (1.1.32). The
protagonist of the second ballad undergoes a surreal version of the fate
which Perdita herself would have suffered if Florizel had proved
disloyal, namely, that of being "turn'd into a cold fish for she would
not exchange flesh with one that lov'd her" (4.4.275-80). (Perdita
probably expects this to be her fate at the start of the scene, since
she figures primroses, which represent chastity, as "maids" who "die
unmarried, ere they can behold bright Phoebus in his strength"
-4.4.122-25). Nevertheless, the third song implies that even this
frustration is ultimately preferable to the insecurity and jealousy of
Dorcas and Mopsa, who have clearly committed themselves deeply, and
"exchange\[d\] flesh" with the clown, without securing any guarantees of
his future intentions (4.4.286-308, 4.4.237-41, 4.4.162-63).

Traditionally of course the onus has been on women more than men to
practise continence. This is partly because illegitimate children are
naturally a more pressing problem for women: the "streak'd gillyvors,"
which are "Nature's bastards," bloom freely in high summer, but Perdita
is determined not to "get slips" of them -a term which can be applied
both to bastards and carnations (4.4.82-85). Although at some point
Dorcas may disrupt the clown's carefree life by attempting to "give him
again" the baby which Mopsa alleges her rival has conceived, he would
still perhaps have the option of denying that he was the father
(4.4.239-41).

There is, however, a more fundamental reason for this imbalance in
gender roles: Autolycus' songs about female continence and male
fickleness are quickly followed by a "rough" and extremely energetic
dance involving twelve men (4.4.324-31). The suggestion is that the
twelve dancers share natural characteristics which are generically male,
since, despite being drawn from a variety of manual occupations, they
all perform the same "gambols." The fact that they are all dressed as
satyrs, or "men of hair," provides a hint that men in particular have a
tendency to concentrate directly and exclusively on their own sexual
gratification. The implication is that this narrow focus on
"pleas\[ing\]" themselves "plentifully" in such an unrestrained way,
combined with the spirited pride which leads some of them to "report"
that they have "jump\[ed\] twelve foot and a half" at court, prevents
them from showing the restrained care which is needed to develop
romantic relationships, for the women reject the dance as "a gallimaufry
of gambols, because they are not in't" (4.4.324-39). It even prevents
them from forming close friendships, it would seem, since they share
only a rough camaraderie in "threes." These points are supported by the
clown's earlier reflections on the "four and twenty nosegays for the
shearers" which Perdita has requested for the feast: they are again
"three-man song-men all and very good ones," but they have no-one to
sing the treble notes, since "they are most of them means and bases,"
except, significantly, a restrained "Puritan," who only "sings psalms to
hornpipes" (4.3.41-45). The implication of all this is that men in
particular are prone to succumb to a heady mixture of spirited pride and
physical desire, which is incompatible with enduring romantic love.

The clown embodies the mixture of physical passion and pride which is
symbolised by the twelve dancers, since he not only uses the hapless
Mopsa and Dorcas to satisfy his sexual desire, but appears to relish the
power which he exerts over them: he is "so in love with" Autolycus'
third song that he allows the latter to pick his pocket while he is
learning "both tune and words" (4.4.309, 4.4.604-09). The tension in
male nature between these distracting elements and the longing to form
constant attachments, which inevitably entails restraint, is reflected
in the disagreement between the shepherd, who wants to send the dancers
away, and the king, who insists on being "refresh\[ed\]" by the
entertainment (4.4.332-41). Typically, the moderate shepherd is swayed
by the fact that his guests "are pleas'd," but has no interest in their
frenzied performance himself (4.4.340-41). Like Florizel, the shepherd's
enjoyment of watching his beloved wife "dance her turn" in an orderly
way--unlike the twelve men, he did not take centre stage himself--merged
naturally with an ongoing admiration for her singing and speaking
(compare 4.4.55-62 and 4.4.136-46).

The shepherd has had a life-time to discover what really pleases him,
but Shakespeare does not underrate the power that sexual desire exerts
over younger men: perhaps even the deeply passionate Florizel might at
first have been distracted by the intense stimulus of artificially
enhanced physical pleasure, if Perdita had been less continent--although
now he would doubtless hotly deny any such imputation--since he implies
that he too would have bought his mistress "silken treasury," if she had
not scorned such "trifles" (4.4.356-60). The prince may find it even
harder to moderate his sexual desire than Perdita: it is noticeable
that, although he declares that his "lusts" do not "burn hotter than
\[his\] faith," he never claims that they burn any more coolly
(4.4.33-35).

The dancers' foregrounding of pride and physical desire is ultimately
perverse, even though both are of course entirely natural drives, for
paradoxically their dance, like the grafted carnations, is an "art"
designed to "mend nature" that "nature \[itself\] makes" in the first
place: they have in fact deliberately "made themselves all men of hair"
and presumably rehearsed their graceless dances, in what is, despite
appearances, an artificial display (4.4.326). This implies that,
paradoxically, men too have to distort their underlying nature in order
to give free rein to their spirited pride and physical desire, even
though they are particularly prone to such incontinence, since they too
can only ultimately fulfil their nature through constant attachments.
The men's apparently wild leaping is implicitly contrasted with the
beautiful dancing of Perdita and the shepherd's wife, who, as we have
seen, restricts herself to "danc\[ing\] her turn" (4.4.58, 4.4.140-43,
4.4.176). This measured mode of dancing is an apt symbol for a passion
which is restrained by a grace that serves to unite lover and beloved in
a perfectly harmonious experience, since the instinctive vigour of such
dances is naturally regulated by a sympathetic sense of what might be
pleasing to the onlooker.

Whereas men often find it difficult to moderate their pride and physical
passion, even though many will instinctively understand that this is the
only way to fulfil their nature, the fact that the three main female
characters in the play are all motivated primarily by their deepest
attachment indicates that women are less easily distracted from their
underlying needs: indeed, the plot is carefully designed to allow
Paulina, Hermione and Perdita to provide the benchmark for constancy in
friendship, parenthood and romantic love respectively, thus covering the
three main types of attachment which the play examines. Although the two
shepherdesses are perhaps the nearest female equivalent to the twelve
dancers in their vanity and focus on physical desire, they come closer
to acknowledging their own deeper passions than the "men of hair," or
their lover, for, as we have seen, their part in Autolycus' third song
is to express a desperate need for constancy; indeed, their
self-beautification is itself partly motivated, however mistakenly, by a
desire to secure the clown's love.

Overall, therefore, Florizel and Perdita set the standard of absolute
constancy by which the other romantic or sexual relationships in the
play are judged. They demonstrate that in order to earn a trusting
intimacy, lovers must show courage and moderation, subordinating not
only all potentially divisive fears and desires, but any manifestation
of pride, or self-love, to their ruling passion. The lovers are wiser
than they seem, for their initial continence will help to generate a
deep and constant intimacy, whereas the artificially stimulated pride
and sensuality of the clown and his mistresses are bound to be
ephemeral. Moreover, although Perdita seems to be a "bark of baser kind"
from the perspective of the conventional hierarchy, her relationship
with Florizel is in fact absolutely just, or equitable--as, ironically,
Polixenes himself unconsciously implies when he defends "marry\[ing\] a
gentle scion to the wildest stock"[^16]--for in reality she is an
aristocrat of the soul, so to speak, since her upbringing has prepared
her to deliver the ability to cultivate "the crown imperial" of a
constant, reciprocal devotion (see below), which, as Florizel realises,
is a far more substantial reward than any artificial crown (4.4.92-95).

The shepherd's marriage illustrates the enduring joy which will be
Florizel and Perdita's reward if they can sustain their mutual care.
Like Florizel, the shepherd admired his beloved's conversation, her
singing and her dancing equally, as has been noted, and no doubt helped
to stimulate his wife's unstinting "labor" with extended, heartfelt
eulogies such as the one he delivers when he is exhorting Perdita to
imitate her virtues (4.4.55-62). In contrast with Leontes' marriage,
where both praise and trust are in short supply (1.2.90-101; see below),
the shepherd clearly came to trust his diligent wife so deeply that, far
from feeling jealous, he could actively relish the way in which she was
"now...on his shoulder, and his," as she strove to make their parties a
success (4.4.57-58).

The flowers of "middle summer"--all pungent herbs--that Perdita
considers to be appropriate gifts for middle aged men, invite us to
reflect on the ways in which trust is developed, or on the contrary
degraded in mature romantic relationships, since they represent
respectively mistrust, virtue, sexual love, joy and grief/jealousy:

Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram,

The marigold that goes to bed wi' th' sun,

And with him rises weeping.

(4.4.104-06)

Although Hermione is not the principal target of Leontes' jealous rage,
as has been argued above, the king's paranoid suspicions and the callous
way in which he acts them out are of course indications that his
marriage is not securely founded on mutual trust and sympathy. His
attachment to his queen is primarily physical: he describes his
courtship--which was "crabb'd," even though it only lasted three months,
reflecting his characteristic, fiery impatience--in typically sensual
terms, as an effort to "make \[her\] open \[her\] white hand"
(1.2.101-05). After he has driven her away, he misses her "full eyes"
and the "treasure" of her lips, rather than, for instance, her singing
or her conversation, and, when he finally sees her again, he is
disconcerted by her wrinkles (5.1.53-54, 5.3.27-29). Leontes'
perfunctory plan to "new woo \[his\] queen" betrays a complete inability
to appreciate the depth of Hermione's anguish over her son's death
(3.2.156). Although he undoubtedly has a "bitter" sense of loss after
his wife's apparent death, he is still focused on "the wrong \[he\] did
\[him\]self," rather than on the pain he has caused Hermione: he blames
himself only for having "destroyed the sweet'st companion that e'er man
bred his hopes out of" (5.1.6-12). Thus, even a penitent Leontes finds
it difficult to moderate his self-love and sensual desire sufficiently
to display the sympathetic care which love demands.

By contrast, Hermione's love for her husband is almost as deep as
Perdita's for Florizel--it is in fact she who initiates one of the
play's recurring images by referring to him as "the crown and comfort of
\[her\] life"--although, as we shall see, she is constantly hurt by his
graceless behaviour (3.2.94). She responds indignantly to Polixenes'
implication that the queens whom he and Leontes have married are in
effect "devils" whose physical beauty has "tempt\[ed\]" them away from
the "innocence" of their original friendship, declaring that this claim
could only be justified

If you first sinn'd with us, and that with us

You did continue fault, and that you slipp'd not

With any but with us.

(1.2.84-86)

Leaving aside her bantering reference to the probability that the kings
were not virgins when they married, the serious part of Hermione's
riposte is her sardonic demonstration of the absurdity of Polixenes'
idea that a constant marriage could ever amount to a distracting
"temptation." This implicit argument is undermined, however, by the fact
that she cannot find a stronger measure of Leontes' constant love than
his sexual continence.[^17]

Hermione's repeated, sardonic pleas for "Grace," in response to Leontes'
remark about her never having spoken "to better purpose," which is no
doubt just the latest example of his boorish disregard, echo her
indignant reaction to Polixenes' implicit denigration of her marriage--
"Grace to boot!"--in such a way as to highlight the crucial role played
by "grace" in mature relationships (1.2.99, 1.2.105. 1.2.80).[^18] To
lack 'grace' is to lack the reciprocal interplay of gratitude and
gratification that generates the joyous sense of unity which Shakespeare
sees as the ultimate, irreducible good: Hermione is desperate for
Leontes to show that he returns her single-minded devotion by praising
her, for "praises are \[the\] wages" which can drive lovers "a thousand
furlongs" (1.2.91-96). Ironically, it was a desire for praise which led
Hermione to exert herself to make Polixenes extend his stay in the first
place: she had intended to remain silent until the latter had sworn to
depart, presumably so as to earn the maximum gratitude from Leontes when
she eventually stepped in to change his friend's mind (1.2.28-30).

Thus, although Hermione's problems are less immediately obvious than the
shepherdesses', her position even at the start of the play is almost as
wretched, since she too has chosen the wrong partner in whom to invest
her devotion. The marriage has in fact been sustained more by her
passionate desire to gain Leontes' "favor" than by an actual reciprocal
intimacy (3.2.94). Even as Hermione is suggesting that "for ever
earn\[ing\] a royal husband" should take precedence over "for some while
\[earning\] a friend," Leontes is fuming with a jealous anger which,
quite apart from the fact that it is focused on his friend rather than
his wife, is symptomatic of the underlying pride which has prevented him
from returning her sympathetic care (1.2.106-08). In this way,
Shakespeare illustrates the torment that can be inflicted within many
supposedly well-established relationships, when the craving for intimacy
is thwarted.

Hermione is quite ready to die after losing both her husband and her
children, since, like the shepherd, she values her family ties more than
life itself (3.2.42-45, 3.2.92-101, 4.4.454-56; see below for Hermione's
maternal affection). She embraces Leontes at the end of the play--having
been given several opportunities to appreciate the earnestness of his
repentance by the diligent Paulina[^19]--as she must do in order to
re-enter society, but does not speak to him; her passionate words are
reserved for Perdita, for whom alone she says she has "preserv'd
\[her\]self," and the play ends with a match made between Camillo and
Paulina rather than with a rapprochement between the king and his queen,
as one might have expected (5.3.23-42, 5.3.71-73, 5.3.111, 5.3.141-46).
The silent implication--made without interrupting the apparently
harmonious ending of the play--is that Hermione could never forgive
Leontes for his abandonment of Perdita and the death of Mamillius.[^20]
Thus, Shakespeare illustrates the inevitable corollary of his teaching
that constant devotion must be earnt through self-denying, sympathetic
care: through his narrow self-love the king has entirely alienated
Hermione, who was in fact offering him the ultimate good.

Parenthood
==========

Shakespeare outlines a hierarchy of erotic devotion in the play, in
which characters are ranked not only by their capacity to form constant
attachments, but also by their ability to transmit this capacity to
future generations through parental care. As the opening scene implies,
parental investment in the "hope" and "promise" of children is the
consequence of an inevitable clash between the instinctive desire to
perpetuate attachments and a rational awareness of death. The intrinsic
satisfactions that parents derive from aligning themselves with the
interests of their children--which are, as we have seen, common to all
deep attachments--are reinforced by the vicarious relish which they take
in their child's future happiness, which arms them against the
inevitable moment when death will strip them of all their attachments.
Here again Hermione and the shepherd provide the standard by which the
other parental figures in the play can be judged. In contrast with
Leontes, who, as we shall see, concentrates narrowly on the bodily
resemblances between himself and Mamillius, and disowns his daughter
because he considers her to be a bastard, the shepherd's successful
adoption of Perdita serves to abstract the desire to "continue...loves"
as a motive for parental care from the urge to reproduce genes. (This
contrast is sharpened by the fact that he too assumes that the baby is
illegitimate, but directs his censure only at the lack of care which its
parents have displayed -3.3.72-76.)

The instinctive "pity" which the shepherd feels for the "pretty" child
represents the first stage in a process which ultimately leads parents
to deliver sympathetic care in order to nurture the "promise" of
children (3.3.70-76). His characteristically modest remark that he
"should be silent," rather than boasting of Perdita's "feat\[ness\]" and
her ability to give Florizel "that which he not dreams of," actually
betrays the fact that his praise of her is partly a celebration of his
own achievement in transmitting his passionate constancy to his daughter
(4.4.176-80). The vicarious satisfaction which he derives from Perdita's
future happiness is intensified by his knowledge that her loving heart
has been nurtured by his own care. The shepherd has indeed made every
effort to pass on to Perdita the diligent generosity which has allowed
him and his wife to lead such fulfilling lives: in his opening speech he
reminds his daughter that she cannot "retire...as if \[she\] were a
feasted one," but that now, as "the hostess of the meeting," she should
imitate her adopted mother's "labor," and welcome even "unknown
friends...for it is a way to make us better friends, more known"
(4.4.55-68). Secure in the knowledge that he has exerted himself in this
way, he can simply relish the intimacy that she has developed with
Florizel as an extension of his own passionate attachments, rather than
focusing primarily on the sadness of losing a child (4.4.168-80). The
thought that it is possible to "continue...loves" into future
generations through parental care therefore gives a particularly
forceful impetus to parental devotion, even in comparison to the
intensity of romantic love or intimate friendship.

In contrast with Polixenes, whose extreme fury with Florizel stems, as I
will argue, from his fear of an unremembered death, the shepherd values
his life only insofar as it forms an integral link in a great chain of
attachments, stretching from his forebears to his descendants: his first
reaction to Polixenes' threats is not to rebuke Perdita, but to pray for
his life to end "within this hour," lest a summary execution should
prevent him from fulfilling his wish to "die upon the bed my father
died, to lie close to his honest bones" (4.4.453-56). Because he has
devoted himself to this enduring chain of attachments, he is able to
"keep seeming and savour all the winter long," like rosemary and rue,
the "flow'rs of winter" and of old age, which represent "grace and
remembrance" respectively, rather than focusing on his own physical
decay and eventual death (4.4.74-76). Just as he honours the memory of
his father's virtues, so he gracefully merges his interests with those
of the next generation through his sympathetic care.

Although one might be tempted to imagine that Perdita is "too noble for
this place" because of her royal blood, the truth is, therefore, that
her inheritance is a much more substantial "crown imperial" than
Florizel's, since she has been primed to practise and transmit
passionate constancy by adopted parents who have themselves received
this care from their own "honest" forebears -whereas the prince has
experienced a parental love which is, as we shall see, sincere, but in
fact impeded precisely by Polixenes' sense of his own royal dignity
(4.4.156-59). Perdita has learnt from her parents' example that each act
of painstaking care is an investment which might gain the supreme reward
of an intimate attachment. The role of hostess perfectly illustrates the
combination of open-heartedness and discipline which is required to
generate such attachments: Perdita's tactful "labor" to ensure that her
two guests are not offended by being offered winter flowers serves to
"make \[her\] better friends" as surely as Hermione's equally graceful
efforts to put Polixenes at ease (4.4.72-79, 4.4.103-12).[^21] This
mixture of generosity and self-control may be partly what inspires
Camillo to assist the young lovers, since he praises her both at this
point in the play and later, when she blushes at Florizel's compliments
in a way that is simultaneously passionate and modest (4.4.159-61).
Similarly, it is the combination of Perdita's concern lest Florizel woo
her "the false way," and her passionate "swear\[ing\]" to imitate the
turtle doves who "never mean to part" that induces Polixenes, almost
despite himself, to express admiration for her "noble" demeanour, thus
no doubt facilitating his eventual acceptance of a shepherdess for a
daughter-in-law (4.4.146-59).

The shepherd reminds Perdita of the example set by his wife, rather than
directly rebuking or instructing her, because he knows that children
have their own strong passions, which are not necessarily amenable to
any direct form of control. This point is highlighted in the most
dramatic manner by Perdita's secret affair with a prince, but the clown
also illustrates perfectly his father's rueful comment that in the "age
between ten and three-and-twenty...there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting"
(3.3.59-63). The shepherd wisely limits himself to venting his
criticisms of the "boil'd brain\[ed\]" clown in private--and even there
in highly generalised terms, as if he can hardly bear to admit that he
is talking about his son--and avoids rebuking him when he eventually
appears, although the youth, who is perhaps nineteen (3.3.64), has not
only failed to help him to gather the flock, but, judging by the
huntsman's cry with which he announces his presence, was actually
himself involved in the very hunt which has just "scar'd away" the "best
sheep" (3.3.63-80). The shepherd does not even rebuke the clown for
failing to come to Antigonus' aid, despite the fact that the latter
"cried to \[him\] for help," although he does leave his son in no doubt
that he himself would have interceded (3.3.107-08, 3.3.96).

When the clown reappears sixteen years later, now presumably in his
mid-thirties, and so well beyond the danger period outlined by his
father, he seems to be much more reliable, since he has clearly been
trusted to sell a large amount of wool and to procure everything that
Perdita needs for the feast (4.3.32-49). Moreover, he shows a
sympathetic concern for the supposedly beaten Autolycus, which contrasts
strikingly with the callousness of his response to the deaths of
Antigonus and the mariners (compare 4.3.54-114 with 3.3.83-131). Even
the pride which he takes in his conquests (see above) is tempered by a
degree of shame, for he makes persistent attempts to conceal his
incontinence both from his father and from the guests at the party
(4.4.161-65, 4.4.242-48, 4.4.309-13). All of this implies that if
parents remain patient and concentrate on consistently modelling
self-denial and sympathetic care, even the most obdurately wilful child
may well come to appreciate the advantages of these virtues. The
apparently disinterested generosity consistently displayed by the
shepherd, which might even have led him to risk his life in order to
defend Antigonus from the bear, can therefore be seen as prudent on the
deepest level, since, even where it fails to gain him friends, it
enables him to demonstrate to his children the virtues by which the
chain of love is sustained.

In contrast to lovers and friends, parents cannot rely on any return
other than the vicarious delight which they take in their children's
current and future happiness, although one can see from the shepherd's
desire to be buried alongside his father that a well-cared for child is
almost bound to feel deep gratitude and a desire to perpetuate his or
her parents' values. By adopting Perdita, the shepherd has certainly
gained a daughter who could become the mainstay of his old age after the
death of his wife--as is implied by the skilful way in which she assumes
the role of hostess at the sheep-shearing feast--but it would be unwise
to assume that even the most passionately grateful children will
consistently reciprocate parental care. On the one hand younger children
are primarily needy or "parasit\[ic\]," in Polixenes' condescending
phrase, while on the other, the vivid attachments and "stronger blood"
of adolescence and early adulthood naturally tend to override filial
gratitude: leaving aside the clown's unruliness, Florizel "mean\[s\] not
to see \[Polixenes\] any more" after eloping with his beloved, while, as
we have seen, Perdita's concealed courtship actually puts the shepherd's
life in mortal danger twice (1.2.168, 3.3.59-63, 4.4.494-95,
5.1.198-202, 4.4.420-22). Even in the best circumstances parents must
usually accept that their children will leave them to start their own
families, and therefore ideally restrain any trace of possessiveness as
gracefully as the shepherd, since any other response might disrupt the
alignment of interests which they have striven to establish
(4.4.379-91). Overall, parental devotion thus requires an even greater
degree of self-control than other forms of constant attachment -although
this effort is, as we have seen, "justified" by the fact that the
potential rewards are far more enduring.

As we have seen, Hermione's family is her ruling passion: at her trial
she declares that she "only...stand\[s\] for" her honour because "'tis a
derivative from me to mine," since protecting her children from disgrace
matters far more to her than her status as "a great king's daughter," or
even her own life (3.2.37-45). Subsequently, we have noted that she
takes refuge with Paulina mainly because she cannot forgive a husband
who has apparently destroyed both of the children who formed the heart
of the family to which her life has been devoted. At the end of the
play, she declares that she has only "preserv'd \[her\]self" at all in
order "to see the issue" of the oracle's announcement that Perdita may
return some day (5.3.121-28). It is significant that Paulina, who knows
Hermione so well, imagines her ghost shrieking "Remember mine," rather
than "Remember me," like the ghost in *Hamlet* (5.1.65-67). Overall,
Hermione is courageous because her self-love is entirely subordinated to
her parental devotion.

Hermione's parental devotion is wise and restrained as well as
courageous. Whereas the first lady retaliates indignantly when Mamillius
rejects her--partly for speaking to him as if he "were a baby still" and
partly because he prefers a second lady with more attractive "black
brows," the humble queen restrains herself from rebuking the
"troubl\[ing\]" boy, and instead puts the onus on him to tell her a
story--because he is "pow'rful at it"--even though this means being
subjected to "sprites and goblins" (2.1.1-32). In contrast with the
first lady, Hermione's concern for him is undiminished by the prospect
of a second child: she takes the shortest possible break before resuming
her effort to give him the undivided attention which he still needs at
the age of five (for Mamillius' age compare 4.1.5-6, 5.1.115-18 and
5.1.126-30). After coaxing Mamillius repeatedly to sit down next to her,
just as he has no doubt done countless times before, she is eventually
able to recall him to the special intimacy which they both clearly enjoy
so much: they decide together that he should tell the tale "softly,"
right "in \[her\] ear," so that the ladies in waiting "shall not hear
it" (2.1.27-32).

Under Hermione's auspices the prince learns that he can only satisfy his
craving for intimacy by moderating his proud assertiveness and
nit-picking concern with physical appearance, and speaking "softly" to
those he loves. Without his mother's guidance Mamillius might have
wasted his life--if, that is, he had reached adulthood--in a thrusting
and boorish pursuit of a fleeting sensual stimulation, which, like the
grafted carnations and the clown's desire for Mopsa and Dorcas, would
have been generated naturally, but subsequently enhanced by artificial
means: he already declares that he prefers eyebrows to display "not too
much hair there, but in a semicircle, or a half-moon made with a pen"
(2.1.6-11). Mamillius' ultimately fatal terror at the prospect of his
mother being executed for adultery is a measure of the extent to which
Hermione has secured his enduring affection through her humble,
sympathetic care (3.2.144-45). If her son had lived, this care would
doubtless have enabled Hermione, whose name means 'messenger of the
gods,' to transmit her capacity to form deep attachments to future
generations. This is the only recompense that devoted parents can
reliably expect to gain, but it 'justifies' all their sacrifices. If the
patient sympathy which Hermione shows Mamillius is distinctively
maternal, then it is possible that women are particularly well suited to
making these sacrifices, and are therefore more likely than men to gain
the ultimate reward.

By contrast, Leontes' influence is apparent precisely in the boorish
arrogance and superficial concentration on physical appearance which
Mamillius exhibits when he deserts the first lady for the second -as is
perhaps implied by the second lady's surprised question, "Who taught'
this?" (2.1.7-11). The king praises Mamillius only for his feisty
willingness to "fight" anyone who does him down, which he no doubt sees
as perpetuating his own noble spiritedness, and, as we have seen, models
a marital relationship in which he does not compliment Hermione at all,
unless one counts his graceless reference to her "open\[ing\] her white
hand" to his "crabb'd" advances (1.2.153-63, 1.2.101-05). Mamillius may
not love his father, as is implied by the wary neutrality of his
response to being called a "calf"-- "Yes, if you will, my lord"
(1.2.127)--but he is certainly influenced by him: the curious abruptness
of his declaration that he is "like" Leontes suggests that he has
understood enough of the king's meditations on their physical
resemblances and on the fickleness of "a bawdy planet" to feel the full
insecurity of his own position (1.2.121-46, 1.2.187-208).[^22] It is
possible indeed that his "troubl\[ing\]" behaviour in the next scene
represents a deliberate effort to confirm this "like\[ness\]," or even
to unleash both in himself and others the "bawd\[iness\]" which he might
now assume to be pervasive. We can infer that the sympathetic Hermione
senses that her son's perspective on the world has somehow shifted, and
encourages him to tell his "sad tale...of sprites and goblins" partly in
order to exorcise the darker feelings--perhaps adumbrated by the imagery
of the "black brows" and the "half-moon"--which are driving him to
"trouble" her "past enduring" (2.1.1-32). Thus, the indications are
that, without Hermione's influence, Leontes' would have passed on to
Mamillius only the sensuality and untrammelled pride which lock the king
into his own fleeting existence, and so condemned his son to a similar
fate.

Leontes loves his son partly because he reflects his own proud
self-assertion and partly because they are physically "almost as like as
eggs" (1.2.129-35; see also 1.2.122, 1.2.153-63, 2.1.57-58). He is
capable of showing a casual concern for Mamillius' future well-being--
"happy man be's dole" (1.2.163)--but, although he observes him closely
enough to worry about his loss of "spirit...appetite \[and\] sleep" as
the trial of Hermione approaches, his assumption that his decline is
caused by his "nobleness" reacting with "shame" to "the dishonor of his
mother," leads him to overlook the "conceit and fear of the Queen's
speed" which is in fact what eventually kills him (compare 2.3.10-18 and
3.2.144-45). Thus, Leontes' proud insistence that Mamillius has
inherited his own spirited assertiveness prevents him from forming the
sympathetic parental bond which might have allowed him to care for his
son.

Leontes' emphasis on Mamillius' inherited assertiveness shows that he
too is motivated by the "hope..." for the future which underlies all
parental love, although in his case this "promise" is distorted by
self-love (1.1.34-46). This point is confirmed by the fact that it is
Mamillius' death rather than Hermione's apparent demise, or Paulina's
remonstrations, or even Camillo's flight, that recalls the king to the
underlying needs which he has temporarily displaced by his proud rage
(3.2.145-72, 3.2.232-43). From this moment on he feels deeply "the wrong
\[he\] did \[him\]self" in leaving his kingdom "heirless" (5.1.8-10).
When Paulina reminds him that he has "kill'd" Hermione, he simply asks
her to "say so but seldom," as the memory is so "bitter," whereas, by
contrast, his son "dies to \[him\] again when talk'd of," in a way that
is likely to "unfurnish \[him\] of reason" (5.1.12-19, 5.1.119-23).
Mamillius' death inspires Leontes to display a degree of humble
self-discipline, perhaps for the first time in his life: he visits his
and Hermione's grave every day--the latter being included in this
ritual, one may infer, mainly because he has "bred his hopes out of" her
(3.2.234-43, 5.1.11-12).

Leontes' willingness to forgive Florizel's deception and plead the cause
of the young couple, who remind him so powerfully of his own children
(5.1.130-34), suggests that his losses have at last forced him to
appreciate that it is only by striving to merge his interests with those
of the next generation through humble, diligent service that he can hope
to "continue \[his\] loves" (5.1.204-34). However, Leontes still feels
self-pity rather than an agonised appreciation of the pain that he has
caused his children-- "What might I have been, might I a son and
daughter now have look'd on, such goodly things as you"--and, as we have
seen, regrets mainly "the wrong \[he\] did \[him\]self" in leaving his
kingdom "heirless" (5.1.176-78, 5.1.8-10).[^23] We are reminded of his
limitations when he "worries...his daughter with clipping her," and
"wound\[s\]" her in his anxiety to "bravely confess..." to and
"lament..." his treatment of her mother--no doubt in an effort to
receive an assurance of forgiveness--rather than gaining her trust by
applying himself diligently to the bitter task of actually appreciating
her feelings (5.2.53-54, 5.2.84-89). Thus, Leontes is unable to complete
the alchemical process which has allowed Hermione and the shepherd to
transmute the possessiveness of their parental attachment into
apparently selfless care. Nevertheless, although he is seemingly only
able to suspend his self-love completely in his friendship with Camillo,
where he can gain the ongoing reward of a commensurate, reciprocal care,
he is clearly straining to restrain his tyrannical impulses in his
generous and humble treatment of the young lovers.[^24]

As has been noted, the sensitive and passionate Hermione guesses that
Polixenes' desire to return home is sparked by an intense "long\[ing\]
to see his son," rather than by marital devotion--which she silently
discounts as a possible motive, having presumably already understood
that he views wives primarily as sexual "temptations"--or by the
political threats which he himself blames for his departure (1.2.34-37,
1.2.76-80, 1.2.11-14, 1.2.23-24, 1.2.30-33). Her theory is confirmed
later in the scene, when Polixenes himself finally admits that, "if at
home," his son is "all my exercise, my mirth, my matter" (1.2.165-71).
Although Polixenes is undoubtedly extremely attached to his son, the
disapproval implicit in Hermione's unceremonious threat to "thwack him
hence" if, as she believes, he is indeed feeling the pull of parental
devotion, reminds us that a thoroughly devoted father would not
voluntarily leave his son for nine months (1.2.36-37). Like Leontes, the
ambivalent Polixenes does not seem to appreciate the extent of his need
for his son (or his son's need for him), until he suddenly realises that
he feels bereft without him (see below).

Unlike Leontes, who, despite claiming to be as "fond" of Mamillius as
his friend is of Florizel, is in fact too taken up with his proud anger
to pay him any attention as they walk together, Polixenes genuinely
relishes his son's "varying childness," partly for its own sake, since
he is a "sworn friend," who "cures in \[him\] thoughts that would thick
\[his\] blood," and partly because he shows promise as a "soldier,
statesman" (1.2.164-211). Here Polixenes encapsulates the two chief
motives for parenthood, but gives them his own distinctive twist, as
befits his political priorities: Florizel's trusting attachment is
valued for its own sake, but also for the promise that he can "continue"
a tradition of proud and noble patriotism. However, Polixenes' also
notes, with a plaintiveness which is only partly bantering, that his son
is a "parasite" who cannot directly return his care, and indeed is as
likely to be his "enemy" as his "friend" (1.2.167-68). Taken together,
these points indicate that Polixenes occupies an intermediate position
in the erotic hierarchy: not only is he as concerned that Florizel
should become an honourable "statesman" as he is for his
welfare--although this concern is doubtless itself passionately
patriotic as well as proud--but his self-love makes it difficult, if by
no means entirely impossible, to sustain the asymmetric care that
parental devotion inevitably requires.

The conflict between Polixenes' proud desire to prevent the royal blood
from being sullied by a "sheep-hook" and his genuine concern for
Florizel's happiness, implicit in his declaration that the "noble"
Perdita would be "worthy" of his son, "but for our honor therein," leads
him to hesitate before parting the lovers at the sheep-shearing feast,
even after he has established beyond doubt that Florizel, "a sceptre's
heir," is treating Perdita as something more than a temporary mistress
(4.4.19-20, 4.4.434-37, 4.4.344-417). Even as he is finally steeling
himself to "part them" in what he probably hopes will be a relatively
calm and measured intervention, his plan is unexpectedly derailed by
Florizel's apparently callous anticipation of his death, which clearly
gives the king a pang of intense and purely personal anguish: "One being
dead, I shall have more than you can dream of" (4.4.344, 4.4.387-89). At
this point Polixenes abruptly forgets about his official mission and
resorts to urging Florizel repeatedly to consult his father about the
marriage, in a desperate effort to prove to himself that his son is not
devoid of filial affection (4.4.391-414). The king's disguise now
becomes symbolic of his fragmented personality: his pleas spring from
his underlying needs rather than a concern to uphold the status of the
royal family, and appeal to Florizel's filial feelings rather than his
pride in that status -a father's "joy is nothing else but fair
posterity" (4.4.408-09). This impromptu, unacknowledged love test
threatens to undermine the king's proud political mission in a manner
reminiscent of the opening scenes of *King Lear*, for if Florizel had
relented, Polixenes could hardly have simply forbidden him to marry
Perdita after arguing that the choice of a wife should be left to
"reason," aided by "some counsel" (4.4.406-10).

The vicious and uncontrolled nature of Polixenes' eventual response to
Florizel's determined refusal to seek his advice is more a reflection of
the shock that he feels at his son's apparent callousness than his
statesmanlike worries about the royal blood (4.4.417-41). However, it is
typical of the dignified king to channel his personal anguish into a
haughty excoriation of Florizel for stooping to so "base" a courtship
-just as he used a political pretext to justify his desire to return
home at the start of the play (4.4.418-20, 1.2.11-14). His rage, like
that of Leontes earlier in the play, which is also prompted by a
beloved's apparent inconstancy, therefore illustrates the power of pride
to distort deep attachments, but also the power of such attachments to
sway even the proudest souls (1.1.32).[^25]

Polixenes' plan to part the lovers is contrasted with the simple relish
which the shepherd takes in the young couple's love and his assumption
that the role of parents is merely to "know" the "choice" which their
children have made, secure in the knowledge that they have already
modelled the devotion which is needed to establish a happy marriage
(4.4.168-76, 4.4.379-91, 4.4.415-16). This serenity might seem foolish,
since the young couple are actually concealing Florizel's real identity,
but it is justified on a deeper level, since the shepherd has indeed
enabled Perdita to choose a lover who will show her constant care. In
contrast with Polixenes, his ability to care about his child's future
and accept that she must now leave him to pursue her new life both stem
from, and in their turn reinforce, his confidence that she will
"continue \[his\] love...."

Although, unlike his less restrained friend, Polixenes restrains himself
from torturing his son's own beloved in the way that he threatens, he
nevertheless almost destroys the very intimacy which he craves through
his proud anger, since, but for Camillo's prudent efforts, Florizel
might well have deserted him completely at this point: "I mean not to
see him any more" (4.4.422-26, 4.4.494-95). Ironically, Florizel's
casual reference to his inheritance is by no means evidence of a callous
indifference, as Polixenes assumes: his affection has in fact been
secured by a father who has in the past made him "all \[his\]
exercise"--at least when he was at home--as is evident from the guilt
and sympathetic concern which the prince shows in requesting Camillo to
"cast \[his\] good counsels upon \[Polixenes'\] passion," "when he shall
miss me" (1.2.165-71, 4.4.492-96). Nevertheless, Florizel's elopement
does indeed confirm that children are unlikely ever fully to reciprocate
the care that has been invested in their upbringing, since they will
inevitably prioritise their own friendships and romantic relationships,
and ultimately their own children over filial gratitude; not just
because of their "stronger blood," but because they too are arming
themselves against time: they know that their parents' lives are likely
to end even before their own. As we have seen, parents should humbly
accept this imbalance, since their primary aim is to transmit passionate
devotion to future generations through sympathetic care, rather than to
establish a reciprocal intimacy.

Underlying the distress which Polixenes feels over his son's casual
remark is his growing sense of his own mortality, evident in his
insistence that he is "not stupid with age and alt'ring rheums"
(4.4.394-402). The king's pride prevents him from emulating the
shepherd's ability to transcend his own finitude through "grace and
remembrance," as is suggested by his implicit rejection of the "rosemary
and rue," flowers of winter and old age, which Pedita offers him
(4.4.73-79, 4.4.454-56). Ironically, this slightly churlish act forces
his hostess to substitute a much less complimentary gift, for, as we
have seen, "the flow'rs of middle summer, and...of middle age" can
signify mistrust and grief as well as virtue and joy (4.4.103-08). In
fact, the ambiguous flowers of middle summer are absolutely appropriate
for the ambivalent Polixenes, whose name, which means "one who
entertains many strangers" perhaps suggests that he can simultaneously
entertain a variety of diverse, and indeed contradictory motives.
Although Polixenes loves his son, his self-love prevents him from
integrating himself humbly into a network of ongoing attachments, which
is the only way of mitigating the mortifying, and ultimately
annihilating, depredations of time.

Polixenes' name also perhaps hints that he is a product, or victim, of
the political hierarchy. Although it is entirely natural for less erotic
souls to experience a tension between attachment and pride, since both
are instinctive drives, the amour propre which divides Polixenes from
his son, and indeed from his own loving heart, is undoubtedly aggravated
by his elevated position in this hierarchy. The gulf between father and
son in this respect is revealed by the king's mistaken assumption that
Florizel shares his own love of high rank sufficiently to be controlled
by the threat of being "bar\[red\]...from succession" (4.4.429-31).
Unlike his son, Polixenes' passions are not sufficiently intense to
override the pride which his social status has encouraged him to
prioritise: as has been noted, his attachment to Florizel is from the
start tangled up with the pride which he takes in his son's potential to
become a "soldier \[and\] statesman" (1.2.168). The tension between
these two motives is demonstrated when Florizel, who is in fact an
affectionate son, actually "yield\[s\]" to his disguised father's
arguments for consulting him about the match in theoretical terms, but
still feels forced to conceal his commitment to Perdita, precisely in
the manner that Polixenes finds so painful, by his knowledge that the
king would haughtily condemn his love as inconsistent with the
"gracious...virtues" which are appropriate to his rank (4.4.410-13,
4.2.26-28).

The corollary of Polixenes' relatively unerotic nature is that his
attachments are not sufficiently intense to override his concern with
social status: he is so far from apologising for his rage that he
pursues Florizel to Sicily, where he continues to threaten the shepherd
with execution, and presumably only accepts him as a "brother"
eventually because Perdita turns out to be a princess (5.1.181-85,
5.1.198-202, 5.2.141-42). As with Leontes, his rage is fuelled by
thwarted affection, but unlike his friend, his response continues to be
steered by his self-love. It is ultimately the more passionate Leontes
who supports the young couple, even after realising that they have
deceived him, and regardless of his assumption that Perdita is a
commoner (5.1.208-33). Thus, Leontes' serious, if flawed effort to
moderate his pride, which he eventually realises is the only means of
satisfying the desire to "continue \[his\] loves," is contrasted with
Polixenes' ongoing, futile concern with conventional status, which
allows the king to maintain a degree of civilised decorum even in his
rage, but which ultimately threatens to prevent him from satisfying his
most fundamental needs. The young lovers will always know that it was
Leontes, rather than Polixenes who had their best interests at heart in
the end. However, Polixenes remains a hybrid character to the end,
designed to show the mutually distorting influence which pride and
attachment can exert: not only has his early care helped to prime
Florizel to love Perdita in the first place, but, as we have seen, his
rage is itself fuelled by his deep attachment to his son.

Whereas Polixenes' pride is sublimated into a concern for his public
status, Leontes' rawer self-love is merely facilitated by his political
power, leaving him relatively free of worldly pride. Both types of pride
obstruct the devoted care which is the primary business of parenthood,
but at first Polixenes' sense of his own dignity leaves more room for
such care than Leontes' straightforward self-assertion. Whereas the
younger Leontes lacks the restraint which is required to sustain the
one-sided care that parenthood demands, Polixenes is naturally more
stolid and has therefore been a much better father. This implies that
moderation is a more vital requirement for fathers than passion, for the
aim of parenthood is to deliver and model care rather than to establish
an intense intimacy. However, Polixenes remains an intermediate figure
in the hierarchy of parental affection precisely because of his
relatively unerotic nature, whereas, by the end of the play, Leontes is
straining to reach the level attained by Hermione and the shepherd,
whose radical moderation is, paradoxically, a function of their
passionate attachment to their children.

Overall, therefore, parental devotion is more deep-seated than romantic
love or friendship, because it offers a much more radical way of
transcending the narrowness of human existence than other forms of
attachment. It is parental love that disrupts the two kings' apparently
impermeable self-love: whereas Polixenes is not deeply affected by
Leontes' rage, or indeed, it seems, by his own marriage (1.2.76-80), the
thought that Florizel might be callously indifferent to him overrides
his pride--albeit temporarily--and then drives him to stage a far more
vehement intervention than his official self might consider appropriate.
Similarly, almost as soon as Leontes' suspicions begin to take hold, his
main concern is with Mamillius' legitimacy (1.2.120-35), while his
eventual repentance is triggered and sustained by the guilt which he
feels over his son's death rather than the loss of Polixenes, Hermione,
or even Camillo. Even though Leontes' attachment to the latter is in the
end more deeply fulfilling, the posthumous "hope" and "promise" which
children offer is still bound to be his most urgent concern. However,
although the two kings are used to show that parental affection
continues to exercise a pervasive, often unacknowledged influence, even
when overlaid and distorted by pride, their stories primarily
demonstrate the power of self-love to stunt the humble, generous care
which is required to fulfil this promise.

The Reach of Attachment
=======================

The play as a whole implies that the yearning for constant attachments
exerts a powerful influence over a wide variety of ideologies and
natural drives. As we have seen, truly passionate lovers tend to
moderate sexual desire so that it can facilitate a lasting intimacy,
whereas the less passionate or prudent may remain content with pleasures
which are intense, but fleeting. By contrast, however, passionate
friends, lovers and parents strive to eliminate self-love altogether,
since it is absolutely incompatible with the humble care which constant
attachments demand. Florizel's willingness to renounce his title to the
throne is only the most extreme example of a series of moments in which
the play's most deeply erotic characters sacrifice their pride: thus,
Camillo has no more desire to rebuke the penitent Leontes than Hermione
has to assert herself in response to the "troubl\[ing\]" Mamillius, or
indeed to stand on her royal dignity in the trial scene, where she
defends her honour only because it is "a derivative from me to mine"
(5.2.10-19, 2.1.1-32, 3.2.37-45). At the start of the play, Hermione's
almost humiliatingly honest plea for praise contrasts directly with the
proud rage expressed by the less temperate kings in response to a
similar sense of exclusion (1.2.90-101).

Lower down the erotic hierarchy, however, attachment and self-love
constantly clash, with complex and mutually disruptive effects. Leontes
himself registers with some surprise the strength of the feelings which,
as we have seen, ultimately spring from his thwarted attachment to
Polixenes, although, as we have seen, his pride prevents him from
acknowledging their true source:

Affection! thy intention stabs the centre.

Thou dost make possible things not so held,

Communicat'st with dreams (how can this be?).

(1.2.138-40)

The rages of both kings are driven by frustrated love, but their
frustration is itself the consequence of their pride, and their response
to it is not to offer humble, devoted care, but to double down on this
pride in a manner so savage that, ironically, it disrupts their proud
dignity as well as their closest attachments.

However, even the two kings, whose haughtiness has doubtless been
habitually encouraged by their high status, are eventually forced by the
very thwarting of their longing to "continue their loves" through their
children to acknowledge humbly the depth of this longing -if only
temporarily in Polixenes' case. Although parenthood may therefore be the
most powerful natural antidote to pride, the influence of constant
attachments in all their various forms is pervasive: it is the dominant
force in those who are passionate enough to align themselves with their
deeper needs, and, as we can see from Camillo's desperation to return
home and the shepherdesses' frustrated song, tends in the end to
regulate the behaviour even of friends and lovers who are prone to being
distracted by more superficial concerns. There is only one example of an
absolutely intransigent self-love in the play--that is, Autolycus,
although this exception is itself qualified in the manner outlined
below--to set against the self-denying devotion of Florizel, the
shepherd and the three female characters.

The need for constancy exerts a similarly pervasive influence on those,
like Autolycus and Antigonus, who seek deliberately to deny or defy this
need, whether for base or noble reasons. Although Autolycus' hedonism
seems to contrast so diametrically with Antigonus' piety, the two
characters are linked, I would argue, by their ineffectual efforts to
deny their own most fundamental desires. Having lost his position at
court, Autolycus seems at first to approach his new life of petty,
itinerant crime in an entirely jaunty spirit: he boasts in his song that
he "most go\[es\] right" when he freely "wander\[s\] here and there,"
stealing, drinking and whoring (4.3.87-100, 4.3.5-18). Typically, he
appears unconcerned by the prospect of being called a "rogue," for being
so far officious" as to bring up the subject of Perdita's provenance,
claiming that he is "proof against that title, and what shame else
belongs to't," and maintaining that "'tis all one to \[him\]" whether
"preferment drop on \[his\] head" (4.4.837-41, 5.2.113-23).

However, it is significant that, rather than actually claiming to be
"merry," Autolycus has to enjoin himself to "jog on, jog on...and
merrily hent the stile-a," since "a merry heart goes all the day" while
"your sad tires in a mile..." (4.3.123-26). He presumably sings about
"the red blood reign\[ing\] in the winter's pale," that is, in
spring-time, when "daffadils begin to peer," despite the fact that the
year is "growing ancient"--the sheep-shearing feast is traditionally
held at midsummer, "not yet on summer's death, or the birth of trembling
winter"[^26]--precisely in order to buoy up his "merry heart" and avoid
an unproductive "sad\[ness\]" (compare 4.3.1-4 with 4.4.79-81,
4.3.123-26). Even the thought of the "pale" of winter--taking the phrase
to refer to the 'pallour' of the season rather than the transition to
spring--is in fact bound to oppress the "red blood" and "merry heart" of
those, like Autolycus himself, who have no home to protect them against
the elements.

Although Autolycus is arguably the only character in the play who
experiences no need to form intimate attachments, Shakespeare shows that
even he maintains a sort of loyalty to Florizel, whom he still regularly
calls his "master" (4.4.710, 4.4.834, 5.2.151). With typical
insouciance, he claims to refrain from telling Polixenes about
Florizel's elopement simply because it is "the more knavery to conceal
it," but when this action is considered alongside his subsequent concern
lest the shepherd's plan to inform the king that Perdita is a
"changeling" may form an "impediment...to the flight of \[his\] master,"
it becomes clear that he is actually endeavouring to help the prince
(4.4.678-83, 4.4.709-10). His underlying purpose in attempting to give
Florizel the news first is to "do the Prince my master good; which who
knows how that may turn back to my advancement?" (4.4.834-35). The
"honest\[y\]" which leads Autolycus to pass over two opportunities of
being rewarded by the king in order to help Florizel, does not therefore
happen "by chance," as he misleadingly claims, but is, it seems,
carefully designed to help him regain the comfort and security of a
position at court (4.4.712-13). Although his immediate plan fails
because his 'master' is concentrating exclusively on caring for the
sea-sick Perdita until the lovers arrive in Sicily--at which point the
shepherd happens to deliver his news before Autolycus can claim any
credit for introducing him to Florizel--he still persists in his effort
to be reemployed at court, "beseech\[ing\]" the receptive clown to give
him "a good report to the Prince" (5.2.113-14, 5.2.149-69).

Although Autolycus has made a fool of the clown three times in the most
egregious manner, it may be significant that he concludes the play as
his determinedly dutiful servant: it is the virtuous shepherd and his
son who have led the more secure life, even according to Autolycus' own
entirely material criteria, as is evident from the large profit that
they will make from selling their wool, the product of their committed
labour throughout the year (4.4.50-122, 4.4.604-18, 4.4.783-805,
4.3.32-34). Quite apart from the way in which he has been able to
provide for a family who will transmit and to some extent return his
love, the shepherd's diligence has enabled him to protect himself from
the "pale" of winter much more successfully than Autolycus.

After acknowledging to himself that he could now earn "preferment" for
helping the prince, were it not for the "discredits" of his "former
life," Autolycus vows to "amend" in order to gain the support of his new
"good masters," the shepherd and the clown (5.2.113-22, 5.2.149-74). His
self-love remains untrammelled either by close attachments or by divine
or human sanctions--he braves the "terrors" of "beating and hanging" and
"sleep\[s\] out" any nagging "thought\[s\]" about "the life to come"
(4.3.28-30)--which means that he will always have the capacity to behave
unscrupulously where he can be sure to do so with impunity (5.2.171-73),
but he now thoroughly appreciates the importance of diligently
maintaining the appearance of virtue. The genuine services which he
performs, or attempts to perform, for Florizel indicate that there are
many circumstances under which such an effort might be quite
indistinguishable from true loyalty.

Overall, Autolycus therefore exemplifies in its crudest form the
paradoxical process by which an originally selfish need for lasting
security may ultimately express itself through the provision of dutiful
service. Shakespeare demonstrates that even a man who completely lacks
emotional attachments, and whose relationship with his fellow men is in
fact entirely predatory--Autolycus, whose name means 'the wolf itself',
is named after a mythical thief--may well be driven to provide loyal
care in return for lasting material security. Thus, the lowest level of
the play's erotic hierarchy not only reflects, but even sheds light on
the highest, since Autolycus has no pretensions to altruism, as lovers
often do: the alchemical process which he illustrates reaches its apogee
in Camillo, who similarly wants nothing more than to resume his
relationship with his "master," and Florizel, whose ambitious desire to
secure the "crown imperial" of constant, reciprocal devotion is
transmuted into a far more painstaking self-denial than Autolycus would
ever feel the need to display.

One of the implications of the above argument is that claims to live
entirely in the moment--as when Autolycus attempts to fool himself that
the neediness which drives his effort to help Florizel is "knavery," and
asserts that he is only "honest...by chance"--are likely to be nothing
more than a proud affectation (4.4.681-83, 4.4.712-13). Thus, even at
Autolycus' low erotic level, amour propre conflicts with the humble
service which is needed to create any sort of secure attachment.

Like his namesake, Antigone, Antigonus is ruled by his piety. It is
clear that his religious belief generally supports his attachments,
reinforcing his compassion for the infant Perdita and reverence for the
queen: he worries that Leontes will not "be prosperous" after
effectively "condemn\[ing\]" the "poor thing" to death, unless "blessing
against this cruelty fight on \[his\] side," and initially makes an even
more concerted effort than Camillo to defend Hermione against Leontes'
accusations, while covertly supporting Paulina's more passionate
intervention (2.3.189-92, compare 2.1.140-72 with 1.2.279-324,
2.3.41-52).

Unlike the thoughtful and unscrupulous Camillo, however, who immediately
breaks his promise to murder Polixenes, realising that the duty of
"obedience to a master" may be suspended when the latter is "in
rebellion with himself," Antigonus feels constrained on his "soul's
peril" to abide by his pious "oath" to expose Perdita, even though
Leontes tricked him into engaging in this "ungentle business" in the
first place by encouraging him to vow to do anything to save the baby
(1.2.318-63, 3.3.30, 3.3.52-53, 3.3.34, 2.3.162-85). From the start,
Antigonus disguises the harshness of his mission by imagining that "some
powerful spirit \[will\] instruct the kites and ravens to be
\[Perdita's\] nurses," while later his determination to brave a terrible
storm and the notorious ferocity of the local predators in order to
expose the child in the deserts of Bohemia is reinforced by the
conviction that he is the instrument of "sacred wills (2.3.186-89,
3.3.4-14). Moreover, he takes a dream in which he is addressed by what
he imagines to be the ghost of Hermione--although of course she has not
actually "suffer'd death," as he assumes--as evidence that Apollo has
decreed that the baby should be abandoned in Bohemia, "upon the earth of
its right father," regardless of the fact that the 'ghost' makes no
reference to the gods or admission of marital infidelity (3.3.15-46).
His sudden conviction that Hermione is in fact an adulteress, which runs
completely counter to his stout defence of her in act 2 scene 1, shows
him unconsciously adapting his piety to rationalise injustice and
suppress his instinctive urge to protect the baby.

These comforting rationalisations are, however, only achieved at
enormous psychological cost. The fact that Antigonus cannot in fact
"weep" in the way that he is invited to do in his dream, although his
"heart bleeds," reflects his subconscious awareness that his grim
mission requires him to repress his "better disposition" (3.3.51-52,
3.3.27-32). His abandonment of the infant Perdita is contrasted--and in
fact directly juxtaposed--with the shepherd's decision to care for her,
which is taken out of "pity" and a spontaneous love for the "pretty"
child, rather than a forced conception of his duty (3.3.69-76). The
intensity of Antigonus' instinctive remorse manifests itself in an
insistence that he is "accurs'd," which is arguably what makes him
vulnerable to the bear's attack: even as he flees--without even
attempting to defend himself-- he cries, "I am gone for ever"
(3.3.52-58). Most crucially perhaps, the guilt which he feels for acting
in a way that runs so dramatically counter to his wife's passionate
devotion to the queen and her children--a wife who he has always
believed would not stumble" (2.3.52)--is so desperate that it intrudes
into his dream, in the form of another pious conviction; namely that he
will be punished by never seeing her again (3.3.34-36). In reality, this
'premonition' may reflect a fear--which is in fact quite misplaced
(5.3.132-35)--that the obdurate Paulina could never forgive him.

Thus, Antigonus' piety initially leads him to oppose the king's brutal
plan, and although it subsequently allows him to justify abandoning
Perdita, in the end it reinforces his sense that he has offended against
imperatives dictated by his own deepest needs. These contradictions hint
that, although the conventional codes of the day can be used to
rationalise offences against these natural imperatives, they tend in the
end to be subordinate to the human heart, which is constantly at work,
reshaping these codes in its own image: it is thus only to be expected
that one of Apollo's traditional roles is to protect young children. The
apparently harmonious marriage between Antigonus and the passionate
Paulina points to the broad compatibility between piety and constant
attachments, but Paulina's forthcoming second marriage might remind us
of the underlying moral of Antigonus' story, especially when this story
is contrasted with Camillo's; namely, that prudence may be a better
guide for passionate individuals than pious or noble principle.

Overall, therefore, despite the obvious contrasts, there are significant
parallels between Autolycus and Antigonus, as the similarity between
their names might suggest.[^27] Whereas Autolycus is forced to admit his
need to protect himself against the harshness of nature and therefore to
behave like a loyal friend, Antigonus realises that he cannot live with
religious principles which conflict with the loyalties which are his
*raison d'etre*. In other words, although hedonism and piety present
themselves as guiding principles, in practise neither can override the
need for constant relationships.

Leontes himself is used to illustrate further the complex relationship
between piety and constant attachments. The king's plan, however
abortive, to use the oracle to "give rest" to those who are swayed by
"ignorant credulity"--he specifies Antigonus--and the way in which he
reinforces the conventional loyalty of his "liegeman" by tricking him
into swearing to expose Perdita, certainly demonstrate that piety may be
exploited to justify the arbitrary will of an autocratic ruler
(2.1.189-93, 2.3.158-83). However, as with Antigonus, Leontes'
underlying fear of the gods moderates his callousness as well as
facilitating it: he revokes his order to burn the infant Perdita, for
instance, after his courtiers all insist that it is "so horrible, so
bloody" that it "must lead on to some foul issue" -although of course
exposing her would seem merely to be a less openly barbaric means of
execution (2.3.147-63). Not only does Leontes' involvement of the oracle
in the first place imply a superstitious trust on his part that Apollo
will take his side, but he is ultimately unable to ignore its unexpected
judgement--despite his initial impulse to do just that--after Mamillius'
death catalyses his latent fear of the gods: "Apollo's angry, and the
heavens themselves do strike at my injustice" (3.2.145-47).

From this point on Leontes' religious belief consistently reinforces his
natural grief and guilt: he reflects--not entirely accurately, as we
have seen--that Camillo's "piety" makes his own "deeds...the blacker,"
and vows to visit the chapel where Hermione--as he assumes--and
Mamillius are buried "once a day" (3.2.171-72, 3.2.238-42). When
Florizel first appears, he sees him as a "bless'd" reward which
Polixenes "from heaven merits," whereas by contrast, the gods, having
taken "angry note" of his own "sin," have "left \[him\] issueless"
(5.1.168-76).[^28] Possibly inspired by Leontes' recently expressed fear
that Hermione's "sainted spirit" might haunt him if he were to marry
again, Paulina presents the statue's animation--which is staged in a
chapel--as a "holy...spell," which "require\[es\] him to "awake \[his\]
faith," perhaps in the hope that his pious "amazement" will reinforce
his brittle attachment (5.1.56-71, 5.3.86-105).[^29]

Thus, Leontes' story, like that of Antigonus, shows that although
religion can be exploited in perverse ways, it is ultimately more likely
to reinforce the guilt which stems naturally from a failure to live up
to the austere imperatives of constant attachment. Elsewhere in the play
we can see that piety generally supports passionate fidelity: at her
trial Hermione does not doubt that "pow'rs divine" know that she is
innocent, and therefore gladly refers her case to Apollo (3.2.28-32,
3.2115-16). She is sustained during her long retreat by the oracle,
which "gave hope \[Perdita\] was...in being," while her first impulse
when she sees her daughter again is to pray that the gods will
"pour...graces" from their "sacred vials" upon her head (5.3.121-28).
Similarly, the shepherd shows how religion, and presumably the belief in
an afterlife, can help to satisfy the innate need to "continue...loves":
he wishes to be buried alongside his father by a "priest shovel\[ing\]
in dust" (4.4.455-58).

Conversely, however, Florizel responds purely aesthetically to Perdita's
way of praying and giving alms, listing it alongside the grace with
which she "buy\[s\] and sell\[s\]" simply as a random example of her
adorable "present deeds," for in his eyes she herself is the "queen" of
this "meeting of the petty gods" (4.4.138-46, 4.4.1-5). The
intransigently passionate prince seems to be as indifferent to
conventional beliefs as to the established hierarchy: he has dressed his
mistress up "goddess-like," and blasphemously figures himself as Apollo,
transformed through his passion into "a humble swain" (4.4.10,
4.4.27-35). This tableau may be designed to hint that it is love itself
which generates, and therefore ultimately regulates, the gods.

The fact that the need to form constant relationships ultimately
determines the behaviour of characters who represent such diametrically
opposing principles as Autolycus and Antigonus implies that it exerts a
pervasive influence on a wide variety of codes and conventions. Camillo
and Leontes' analysis of friendship in act 1 scene 2 suggests that even
the four cardinal virtues themselves are ultimately rooted in intimate
attachments: the young lovers show how all four virtues are needed to
generate a perfectly just, and therefore perfectly trusting, reciprocal
devotion, while the relationships of Camillo with Leontes, Paulina with
Hermione and Hermione with Polixenes and Leontes are used to show
respectively how wisdom, courage and moderation ultimately derive their
value from the role which they play in forging attachments. Paulina's
apparent failure to devote the rest of her life to the memory of her
lost beloved, or indeed to cajole the unnamed courtier into doing so,
implies that absolute constancy cannot be sustained purely by a noble,
or, as we would say, moral determination, once it has been divorced from
its roots in intimate interaction. The corollary of this is that there
is no higher aim than the pursuit or defence of love which could provide
the standard by which Camillo's deception of Florizel and the young
lovers' unscrupulous disregard for their fathers' wishes, or even, in
the shepherd's case, his safety, could be condemned. Thus, one could
argue that moral principles, like piety, are both derived from, and
therefore ultimately limited by, the need for constant attachments.

In a similar way, the Sicilian court's adoration of Mamillius indicates
that patriotism represents a natural obtrusion of this need into the
political sphere (1.1.34-46). The prudent Camillo is so desperate to
prevent Leontes' fantasies from endangering his country that he even
contemplates murdering Polixenes, and later he has a "woman's longing"
to "re-view Sicilia," which rivals his desire to see his friend
(1.2.296-98, 1.2.333-39, 4.4.511-13, 4.4.666-67). The ruling elite are
as likely to be motivated by their love of country as by pride, as
Camillo, Dion and Polixenes himself all demonstrate (5.1.24-34,
4.2.10-20).

However, there is no doubt that the tendency towards overbearing
self-assertion which both the kings exhibit has been encouraged by their
high status (5.1.24-34, 4.2.10-20). Similarly, the shepherds' sudden
urge to make authoritative, but baseless claims about Autolycus and
their own social origins is clearly caused by their sudden elevation
(5.2.126-68). While Perdita's lowly upbringing certainly allows
Shakespeare to contrast a natural hierarchy of attachment to the
conventional social order, the examples of the twelve men of hair on the
one side and Hermione on the other imply that pride and the longing for
constant attachments both exert a pervasive influence which transcends
social class. Thus, sexual desire, piety, hedonistic egotism, moral
virtue and political life are all either regulated, or at least
radically modified by the desire for constant attachments, but in all of
these areas this desire is also liable to be disrupted by pride.

Conclusion
==========

Shakespeare starts from the intuition that the ultimate good is to be
gained by lovers, friends and parents aligning their interests with
those of a beloved as closely and as constantly as possible. This is the
only useful point that can be made about the good itself, for, as the
wordlessness of Camillo and Leontes' reunion indicates, there is no
higher standard by which it could be judged; but Shakespeare can conduct
an exhaustive analysis of the means by which the good can be achieved,
and of the pervasive, if partial influence which it exerts, not only
over competing natural drives, such as self-love and sexual desire, but
over ideologies ranging from piety to hedonism. He shows that, although
it is perhaps as instinctive for passionate lovers to be ruled by their
constant attachments as it is for turtle doves (4.4.154-55, 5.3.132-35),
this instinct has endless ramifications for rational beings, who have an
awareness of death, and, to a greater or lesser degree, a capacity for
self-denial and sympathetic care.

The main argument divides constant attachments into parental affection
and mature love, and then in turn subdivides the latter category into
friendship and romantic relationships.

The discussion of the means by which both types of mature attachment are
formed and preserved is structured around the virtues of justice,
wisdom, courage and moderation. Justice and wisdom are the overarching
virtues of the four: passionate lovers understand that they must
subordinate all potentially divisive desires and fears to their
instinctive yearning for constant love, prioritising sympathetic care
for their beloveds in an effort to generate a completely harmonious
rapport, based on mutual gratitude and trust.

The forthcoming marriage of Camillo and Paulina implies that friends and
lovers need to balance the virtues of courage and prudence, which have
contrasting weaknesses and complementary strengths. Paulina demonstrates
that those who are primarily spirited and courageous will defend their
attachment against external threats in the most steadfast manner
possible, but also often in a manner which is noble and sincere, rather
than effective. Not only must staunch loyalty be tempered by pragmatism
at times, but it is prudent to recognise that even such loyalty itself
cannot be maintained with undiminished intensity after a bereavement,
since attachments are ultimately sustained by the interchange of care
described above. However, whereas the wily and sceptical Camillo can
regulate passion in precisely these ways, being completely unmoved by
conventional ideas of nobility, he can also learn from Paulina's--and
indeed Perdita's--intransigent determination to pursue and defend the
ultimate good in the face of "affliction," for those of his thoughtful
temperament are particularly prone to fearfulness.

Hermione and Florizel embody Shakespeare's paradoxical teaching that the
yearning to possess the beloved in the closest possible way is naturally
expressed through humble moderation, since the gratitude and trust which
go to establish an intimate rapport are gained by showing self-denying,
sympathetic concern rather than through a direct assertion of desire. By
contrast, the rage with which Leontes responds to his failure to achieve
such a rapport, which is in the first place the inevitable consequence
of his overbearing approach to relationships, shows how his pride has
combined with his passionate yearnings to stunt his ability to provide
self-denying care. Self-love must be restrained because, whether in the
shape of Leontes' raw spiritedness, or in the sublimated form of
Polixenes' concern with worldly status, it serves only to lock its
adherents into their own narrow existence, thus preventing them from
achieving the ultimate good.

The above points apply equally to romantic or marital love and to
friendship, since all truly intimate attachments must be founded on the
trust which courageous, prudent, moderate, reciprocal care engenders.
Sexual desire, which is the only distinctive element of romantic love,
can often serve as a powerful catalyst for a lasting intimacy, merging
seamlessly with an ongoing intellectual or spiritual admiration for the
beloved. In order to achieve such an intimacy, however, truly passionate
romantic lovers must prudently moderate physical desire, delaying
consummation until they are sure that it will facilitate a constant
attachment, rather than serving as a distraction. By contrast,
intemperate lovers focus on gratifying vanity and physical passion in
ways that are bound to be fleeting, even though they may perpetuate
their pleasures for a while through an artificial stimulation of desire.
Women generally lead the effort to avoid such diversions, partly because
they suffer more directly from the effects of an unwanted pregnancy, but
mainly because they have less to distract them from the *summum bonum*
than men, whose deeper needs are often thwarted by a combination of
their more intensely physical libido and a greater proclivity for proud
and spirited self-assertion.

The third and most intense mode of constant attachment that Shakespeare
explores is parental love. The primal power of parental devotion, which
is even stronger than romantic love or friendship, because it offers a
more enduring "hope" and "promise," is shown by Polixenes' furious
reaction to Florizel's apparent callousness, and by the fact that
Leontes' rage begins with an intense examination of Mamillius'
legitimacy and ends with his death. Although loving parents derive great
satisfaction simply from their child's devotion--as Polixenes' early
relationship with Florizel shows--since any trusting alignment of
interests is intrinsically pleasurable, their ultimate aim is not to
establish an absolutely equitable, mutual devotion, as in the other two
types of attachment, but rather to "continue their loves" beyond their
own deaths by merging their interests with those of their children,
while modelling the care which will allow future generations to
establish constant intimacies.

As with mature attachments, parenthood requires wisdom, courage and
moderation. However, devoted parents must practise a more radical
self-denial than true lovers and friends, since they cannot expect their
care to be fully reciprocated, for children are at first
"parasite\[s\]," and subsequently are bound to prioritise their friends,
lovers and ultimately their own families over filial affection -although
one can see from the shepherd's desire to be buried alongside his father
that a well-cared for child is almost bound to feel deep gratitude and a
desire to perpetuate their parents' values. Aware of this intrinsic
imbalance of investment in the relationship, prudent parents are also
reluctant to intervene directly in their children's lives, understanding
that it is more productive to instruct by example. Their restraint is,
however, fully justified in the end: they and their children will both
be armed against the depredations of time, since they will experience
their own lives as links in an enduring chain of love. By contrast,
parents who are primarily self-loving cannot escape a mortifying sense
of their own ephemerality, and transmit to their children only the
frustration which is the inevitable consequence of an unremitting focus
on their own transient existence.

Overall, the influence of constant attachments is sufficiently powerful
either to regulate or radically modify competing natural drives like
pride and sexual desire. By contrast with sexual desire, which can be
the catalyst for an enduring love, passionate lovers strive to eliminate
pride completely, realising that it is absolutely incompatible with the
humble care which a trusting intimacy demands. Lower down the erotic
hierarchy, however, self-love often continues to conflict with the
yearning for constant attachments, with each of these powerful natural
drives exerting a strong gravitational pull over the other, although
souls which are both proud and passionate may well be forced by loss
ultimately to realise that they have exposed themselves to the
depredations of time, and consequently begin to moderate their
self-love.

Principles as disparate as hedonism and dutiful piety are also regulated
by the need for constant relationships. At the basest level, Autolycus'
proud claim to be happy pursuing his own pleasures in isolation is
undermined by the recognition that he will be exposed to the harshness
of nature, unless he can earn Florizel's protection by serving him in a
manner which is to all intents and purposes loyal. At the other extreme,
pious duty is shown to be equally untenable where it clashes with deep
attachments: although religion can be used to rationalise and justify
actions that run counter to the heart's own imperatives, in the end the
piety of Antigonus and Leontes emphatically reinforces the instinctive
guilt which they feel for contravening these imperatives, just as it
reinforces the constant devotion of Hermione and the shepherd. Indeed,
Shakespeare implies that religion is ultimately derived from, and
therefore regulated by, these very imperatives: at the apex of the
erotic hierarchy, Florizel and Perdita have no need for the support of
piety, since they understand that their passion itself constitutes the
highest authority by which human action can be judged. Paulina's
eventual replacement of Antigonus with Camillo suggests that truly
passionate lovers need no other guide than a prudent analysis of the
most effective means of securing fulfilment.

The influence of constant attachments is pervasive. Although self-love
is more likely to be encouraged and to become engrained among the upper
echelons of the social hierarchy, Florizel, Hermione and Camillo are all
capable of passionate devotion, and the political elite are as likely to
be motivated by patriotism, which is a natural extension of attachment,
as by self-love. Even the cardinal virtues may themselves ultimately be
derived from the austere imperatives of love, since they represent the
only means by which an absolutely trusting, reciprocal care can be
established. This means that the unscrupulousness of the young lovers
and of Camillo at the end of the play is naturally unlimited, since
there is no good greater than deep attachment by which their behaviour
might be regulated. Paulina's putative decision to abort her attempt to
devote her life to the memory of Antigonus exposes the corollary of this
point, namely, that a completely selfless nobility is beyond the scope
of human nature.

As the title of the play implies, the symbol of winter is central to
Shakespeare's argument. It seems a natural image for the potential of
time to "try all," both through the ageing process and its inevitable
conclusion, and through the intrinsic transience of physical desire
(4.1.1).[^30] Perdita is thoroughly aware of the threat which time
presents: she knows that the sheep-shearing feast, which, as we have
seen, was traditionally held at midsummer, when Phoebus--habitually
associated by Shakespeare with sexual desire--reaches his zenith, marks
the moment that the world is "growing ancient, not yet on summer's
death, nor on the birth of trembling winter" (4.4.122-25, 4.4.79-81).
Unlike Autolycus, she immediately rejects her fantasy that it is still
spring and that she could "play on" Florizel forever, "strew\[ing\] him
o'er and o'er" with vernal flowers, as if at a "Whitsun pastoral..."
(4.4.130-34). By dismissing Camillo's desire to spend his time "gazing"
at her as part of her flock-- "You'ld be so lean, that blasts of January
would blow you through and through" (4.4.109-12)--Perdita implies that
the true measure of love is not immediate pleasure, but the ability to
remain constant in the face of "affliction."

Those parents who exercise "grace and rememberance" can, like rosemary
and rue, "keep seeming and savour all the winter long," because, unlike
the proud and sensual characters, who are bound to find their physical
decay and ultimate mortality humiliating and frustrating, their main
focus is on perpetuating a great chain of love across the generations
(4.4.74-75). On a humbler level, friends and lovers can also satisfy
their need to maintain constant attachments through "grace;" a word
which is repeatedly used to encapsulate the interaction between
self-denying service and heartfelt gratitude that sustains constant
attachments. This process is embodied in the sheep-shearing feast, which
gracefully commemorates the diligence of the shepherds who have ensured
that the "good flock shall prosper," often during fierce winter storms,
conducted with no little expense and with an effort on the part of the
leaders of the community to "serv\[e\] all," as "pantler, butler, cook"
(4.4.70, 3.3.2-6, 3.3.84-86, 4.3.32-49, 4.4.55-57).[^31]

By contrast, Leontes' hopes of visiting Polixenes "this coming summer"
are thwarted by his proud fury, which strips him of all his attachments,
and thus, at least from an audience's point of view, condemns him to a
winter that lasts sixteen years (1.1.5-7). Not only this, but, as we
have seen, he is in danger of arresting Mamillius' development in the
same way: the boy's "sad tale...for winter," set in or near a
churchyard, doubtless features a ghostly apparition, which, like the
ghost in *Hamlet*, can be imagined making a melancholy or terrifying
attempt to perpetuate its anger (2.1.23-32). Conversely, Shakespeare's
own winter's tale resembles Hermione's humble effort to comfort
Mamillius: the queen accommodates herself to her son's "sad tale...for
winter," since the life-negating influences that surround him cannot be
ignored, but at the same time "softly" shows him, and indeed anyone else
who can eavesdrop on their conversation, how to secure a lasting warmth.
Shakespeare himself transmits his passionate love in the least dogmatic
manner possible, since he encourages audiences to assume that his own
play is nothing more than an inconsequential folk tale.[^32]

[^1]: All references to the play are from *The Riverside Shakespeare*,
    ed. G. Blakemore Evans et al. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company,
    1997).

[^2]: For a thoughtful analysis of the "wonder" of this meeting, see
    Traversi, "The Final Scenes," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";
    A Casebook,* ed. Kenneth Muir (London: Macmillan Press Ltd., 1968):
    174-75.

[^3]: Mrs Inchbald, "British Theatre," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's
    Tale";* *A Casebook*: 31.

[^4]: This parallel is noted by Richard Proudfoot, "Verbal
    Reminiscence," in *The Winter's Tale": Critical Essays*, ed. Maurice
    Hunt (New York and London: Taylor & Francis Group, 1995): 282.

[^5]: Helen Faucit, "On some of Shakespeare's Female Characters," in
    *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 46.

[^6]: Anna Jameson "Shakespeare's Heroines," in *Shakespeare: "The
    Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 33.

[^7]: Derek Traversi notes that Paulina "imposes upon Leontes an
    abstraction from the current world that will be, in the long run,
    impossible to maintain": "The Final Scenes," in *Shakespeare: "The
    Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 165.

[^8]: This and the subsequent paragraph repeat some of the points made
    in the essay on *Hamlet* on this website: "*Hamlet*: The Limits of
    Constancy." The echo of *Hamlet* in the phrase "Remember mine" and
    the parallel between the contrasting positions of Camillo and
    Paulina and those of the Player King and the Player Queen might even
    suggest that the two plays are companion pieces, which must be read
    together in order to understand Shakespeare's overall teaching on
    constancy. Neither Paulina nor the Player Queen are able to sustain
    their determination to remain faithful after their bereavement: see
    "*Hamlet"* in *The Riverside Shakespeare*: 1.5.91, 3.2.155-223.

[^9]: Jameson writes that "her passions are not vehement," but at the
    same time "unfathomable, and inexhaustible": "Shakespeare's
    Heroines," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 33.

[^10]: Robert G. Hunter, "Shakespeare and the Comedy of Forgiveness in
    *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*:
    159.

[^11]: H. N. Hudson, "Introduction to *The Winter's Tale,"* in
    *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale*"*;* *A Casebook*: 39.

[^12]: Although the argument is very different, Kay Stockholder is, I
    believe, correct to say that Leontes' "fantasy allows him to
    externalize...self-hatred": "From Matter to Magic: *The Winter's
    Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 323.

[^13]: For the crown symbolism, see Wilson Knight, "Great Creating
    Nature," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*:
    144-45.

[^14]: John Bowlby, *Attachment* (London: Pimlico, 1997): 180-98.

[^15]: L. Strauss and J. Cropsey, *The History of Political Philosophy*,
    ed. L. Strauss and J. Cropsey, 2^nd^ ed. (Chicago: Rand McNally
    College Publishing Co., 1972): 3-4.

[^16]: Joan Hartwig, "The Tragicomic Perspective of *The Winter's
    Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 192.

[^17]: For an analysis of the way in which Hermione "takes Polixenes to
    task" in this conversation see Peter Lindenbaum, "The Uses of
    Pastoral in *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical
    Essays*: 204.

[^18]: The word is in fact consistently associated with Hermione:
    Northrop Frye, "Recognition in *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The
    Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 110; Peter Lindenbaum, "The Uses
    of Pastoral in *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale";
    Critical Essays*: 208; Patricia Southard Gourlay, "Female Metaphor
    in *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*:
    267.

[^19]: Helen Faucit, "On some of Shakespeare's Female Characters," in
    *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 47.

[^20]: Robert Bridges notes that "the impossibility of reconciliation is
    passed by in silence," in "The Influence of the Audience in
    Shakespeare's Dramas," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A
    Casebook*: 57. For the view that this is "no easy happy ending, see
    Stanley Wells, "Shakespeare Performances in England, 1987-88," in
    *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 416.

[^21]: For the parallel between Hermione and Perdita as hostesses see
    Richard Proudfoot, "Verbal Reminiscence," in *"The Winter's Tale";
    Critical Essays*: 282.

[^22]: Ellen Terry, "Four Lectures on Shakespeare," in *Shakespeare:
    "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 59.

[^23]: For Leontes' lack of deep remorse, see Arthur Sewell, "Character
    and Society in Shakespeare," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";*
    *A Casebook*: 66.

[^24]: Leontes' transformation is in some ways similar to that of
    another Sicilian tyrant, Hiero, who Xenophon portrays as being
    persuaded that tyranny is not ultimately in his interests: Leo
    Strauss, *On Tyranny. An Interpretation of Xenophon's "Hiero,"*
    2^nd^ ed. (Glencoe Illinois: The Free Press, 1963): 59-62.

[^25]: For the parallel between the two rages see Ernest Schanzer, "The
    Structural Pattern," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A
    Casebook*: 92.

[^26]: Ernest Schanzer, "The Structural Pattern," in *Shakespeare: "The
    Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 89; Peter Lindenbaum, "The Uses of
    Pastoral in *The Winter's Tale,"* in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical
    Essays*: 210.

[^27]: Richard Proudfoot notes that both either suffer, or pretend to
    suffer damage to their shoulders, and suggests that they could
    easily be played by the same actor: "Verbal Reminiscence," in *"The
    Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 287-89.

[^28]: Traversi, "The Final Scenes," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's
    Tale";* *A Casebook*: 170-71.

[^29]: Traversi, "The Final Scenes," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's
    Tale";* *A Casebook*: 182-83.

[^30]: For a general discussion of the importance of time in the play
    see Inga-Stina Ewbank, "The Triumph of Time in *The Winter's Tale*,"
    in *"The Winter's Tale"; Critical Essays*: 139-55.

[^31]: For the shepherd's prudence see Joan Hartwig, "The Tragicomic
    Perspective of *The Winter's Tale*," in *"The Winter's Tale";
    Critical Essays*: 190.

[^32]: For the repeated suggestion that the play is merely an "old
    tale," see S. L. Bethell, "Antiquated Technique and the Planes of
    Reality," in *Shakespeare: "The Winter's Tale";* *A Casebook*: 121.
