---
title: '*Hamlet*: the Limits of Constancy'
# ---

# ---
author: Richard Burrow
created: '2017-07-06'
date: '2023-07-22'
footer: footer1
layout: layouts/post.njk
plain-title: Hamlet 33
---

If, as I have maintained elsewhere, Shakespeare takes friendship as his
*summum bonum*, then fickleness, bereavement and the various responses
to loss become important subjects for philosophical consideration.[^1] I
will argue that Shakespeare presents a structured exploration of the
limits of constancy in *Hamlet*, in which even minor details may be
highly significant. Thus it is the humble Horatio who models the way in
which the passionate man should devote himself constantly to his
friends, while responding prudently to a mutable world. At first Horatio
seems primarily thoughtful: he is generally known to be a "scholar," and
Hamlet sees him as a sceptical materialist who denies that there are any
"things in heaven and earth" beyond those which are amenable to
"philosophy" (1.1.42, 1.5.166-67).[^2] He writes off Marcellus's initial
reports of a ghost as "fantasy," saying that he will believe them only
when they have received "the sensible and true avouch of \[his\] own
eyes," and even when he has actually seen the ghost he still addresses
it as an "illusion" which is "usurp\[ing\]" the king's form (1.1.23,
1.1.127, 1.56-58, 1.1.46-47). When Marcellus associates the ghost with
certain Christian superstitions, Horatio drily remarks that he does "in
part believe it" (1.1.157-65). Later Horatio's precise and measured
description of the apparition is contrasted with Barnardo's and
Marcellus's exaggerations (1.2.237-39).

Horatio is not moved by the proud and spirited sense of honour which
drives many of the other characters in the play: he tells Marcellus to
attack the ghost only "if it will not stand" and admits freely that the
apparition fills him with "fear and wonder," while unashamedly
"trembl\[ing\] and look\[ing\] pale" (1.1.140-41, 1.1.44, 1.1.53). In
contrast, the elder Fortinbras, then the king of Norway, was "prick'd on
by a most emulate pride" to challenge the old King Hamlet to a duel,
while the latter, whose ghost has a "martial stalk," once interrupted
"an angry parle" to attack "the sledded Polacks on the ice" (1.1.83,
1.1.62-66). The old kings' spirited desire for honour has merely
initiated a cycle of violence, for we are told that Fortinbras's son has
just "shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes" in a bold attempt to
avenge his father's defeat (1.1.95-104). Horatio, on the other hand, is
simply concerned to stabilize the political situation: he attempts to
counter Barnardo's tendency to see the ghost as a "portentous" warning
from a dead king, who "was and is the question of these wars," by
presenting the ghost as a mere "mote" in "the mind's eye" compared to
the far more dramatic "harbingers" that foreshadowed the death of
Caesar, and reduces the "majestical" and "invulnerable" figure which
Marcellus describes to the status of a "guilty thing," cravenly obedient
to the "fearful summons" of "the god of day" (1.1.108-25, 1.1.143-56).
Thus, although it seems that Horatio is himself neither honour-loving
nor pious, he is prepared to manipulate those who are more prone to feel
awe and piety than himself: when Marcellus worries that "something is
rotten in the state of Denmark," he immediately assures him that "Heaven
will direct it" (1.4.90-91).

Given Horatio's prudent concern for political stability, it is
particularly surprising that he immediately decides to tell Hamlet about
the ghost, since the prince's volatile reaction might easily have been
predicted by such an old friend. In explaining that it is "needful in
our loves, fitting our duty" to keep Hamlet informed, he implicitly
prioritises the obligations that flow naturally from an intimate
relationship over more conventional moral imperatives (1.1.172-73; see
also 1.2.222-23). After Hamlet has rushed off in pursuit of the ghost,
Marcellus focuses on the "rotten" state of Danish politics, but Horatio
is left to fret anxiously about the prince's state of mind as he "waxes
desperate with imagination" (1.4.62-91). Hamlet seems to have invested
almost as much as his friend in this unusually trusting and loyal
relationship, for when Horatio declares himself to be his "poor
servant," he immediately expresses a wish to "change that name with
\[him\]" (1.2.162-3). Hamlet's delight in meeting his friend, whom he
almost immediately invites to "drink deep," contrasts sharply with the
casual greetings that he offers Barnardo and Marcellus (1.2.165-67,
1.2.175). The prince's admiration for his "fellow student\['s\]"
reliability and commitment to his studies is evident as soon as they
meet, while his later reference to his friend's materialist "philosophy"
suggests that he has been admitted fully into Horatio's intellectual
confidence (1.2.169-73, 1.5.166-67).

Thus in the opening section of the play Shakespeare shows that Horatio
discriminates carefully between two spheres: he is benevolent and coolly
pragmatic in promoting political stability, but prioritizes his deep
attachment to Hamlet above all other concerns.

Claudius is more purely pragmatic than Horatio, adopting coolly prudent
means in order to achieve intensely ambitious ends. Although he claims
in his initial speech that his calm reaction to his brother's death is
the result of "discretion \[fighting\] with nature," he is of course in
reality a cool murderer who is largely unaffected by the intimate
attachments which might otherwise interfere with a prudent "remembrance
of ourselves" (1.2.5-7). Thus in his opening speech he focuses on the
public display of grief rather than the emotional experience, describing
the kingdom as "contracted in one brow of woe" (1.2.4). In an elective
monarchy the "better wisdoms" of the court have "freely gone with"
Claudius's accession to the throne when Hamlet would have been the more
natural choice, probably because they consider him to be better equipped
than the prince to deal with the threat of young Fortinbras's invasion
at a time when the state seems "disjoint and out of frame" (1.2.15-21).
The wisdom of their decision is immediately underlined as Claudius
manages to avoid a war, simply by informing the Norwegian king of the
situation and waiting for him to restrain his rash nephew (1.2.26-33,
2.2.60-71). The success of this plan reveals the parallels between the
royal families of Norway and Denmark, for in both cases a war-like king
has been succeeded by a brother who is prudent rather than passionately
or honourably vengeful, but who has to exert himself to control a more
hot-headed nephew. While Hamlet's barely suppressed grief and anger
threaten to disrupt the fragile political order, albeit less violently
than young Fortinbras's projected invasion, Claudius's indifference to
his brother's death and to the code of honour that drove the old king to
perpetuate the feud with Norway are precisely what allow him to protect
the national interest in a more effective way than either Hamlet himself
or his father might have done, perhaps saving hundreds of lives in the
process. Without the ghost's and Hamlet's interventions it is quite
probable that Claudius would have stabilised the fragile political
situation in Denmark.

We can see Claudius's limitations, however, when he attempts to persuade
his nephew that "to persever in obstinate condolement is a course... to
reason most absurd" because "death of fathers" is a "common theme" of
nature (1.2.88-106). Claudius cannot experience the deep joys of true
intimacy or feel the commensurate pains of loss, which means that he is
unable to comprehend Hamlet's shocked reaction to his mother's early
remarriage. Whereas the king and his court are ruled by prudent ambition
and so have only "the trappings and...suits of woe," Hamlet's desperate
grief "passeth show" (1.2.85-86). In his fragmented and incoherent
opening soliloquy the prince only refers to Claudius and his father in
order to highlight his mother's fickleness (1.2.139-42, 1.2.151-53). His
desolation is of course a measure of the strength of his previous
attachment to Gertrude: all his life he has been sustained by the simple
and natural belief that his mother is as loyally affectionate as he
knows himself to be (1.2.143-45). Many in the audience will understand
immediately that to lose trust in those whom one loves may be to lose
one's very *raison d'etre*, so that the whole world will inevitably seem
"weary, stale, flat and unprofitable" (1.2.133-34).[^3] Nevertheless,
Claudius's arguments for resigning oneself to a mutable world raise one
of the central questions of the play: it would surely be unhealthy for
Hamlet to devote himself to his memories of harmonious family life
forever, but at what point is it natural to move on and can reason play
any role in limiting grief in the way Claudius assumes?

Hamlet is capable of "hold\[ing his\] tongue," but it "break\[s his\]
heart" to do so. The brooding sarcasm of his responses to Claudius shows
that he is as far from being a pragmatic and restrained politician as
the king is from being a loyal and open-hearted lover (1.2.159,
1.2.65-67, 1.2.74). Hamlet's passionate loyalties frequently lead him to
push against the restrictions imposed by his public role, as Laertes
implicitly acknowledges when he warns Ophelia to distance herself from
him on the grounds that, regardless of the possible sincerity of his
current attentions, the prince himself is ultimately "subject to his
birth" and only able to marry "with the main voice of Denmark"
(1.3.10-44). Laertes's advice \--that romantic attachments fade as "the
inward service of the mind and soul grows wide withal"\-- might have
been well judged if applied to a less passionate man, but here it merely
highlights Hamlet's obdurate fidelity and his lack of political ambition
(1.3.10-14). It is noticeable that the prince seems completely
indifferent to Claudius's public nomination of him as his heir, and is
not prevented by any concern for his political status or
responsibilities from directly opposing his uncle's wish that he should
not return to university, but only by his continuing loyalty to his
mother (1.2.108-20). Mindful perhaps of the constraints to which Laertes
has alluded, Hamlet has stopped short of proposing marriage to Ophelia,
but he has made her "almost all the holy vows of heaven" (1.3.113-14).
It is likely, however, that he would have seen these private pledges as
completely binding had they had been fully reciprocated, for he loves
his mistress more than "forty thousand brothers" and has assured her in
an ardent poem that his love is as reliable as the sun and the stars
(5.1.269-71, 2.2.116-19).

Ophelia protests only three times when Polonius orders her to end her
relationship with Hamlet and thereafter obeys her father completely, but
later on in the play she sings as much about jilted love as the death of
her father, implying that the loss of "the honey of \[Hamlet's\] music
vows" is a major factor in her subsequent madness (1.3.99-136,
4.5.23-66, 3.1.155-56). Polonius does not acknowledge her sacrifice,
however, or indeed show her any sort of affection. In fact even his
request that she should see no more of Hamlet is delivered only as a
result of a chance encounter \-- as is his famous advice to Laertes,
which is given quite casually after the latter has formally taken leave
(1.3.52-57, 1.3.88-90). Unlike Laertes, who shows a heartfelt desire to
protect his sister's reputation for her own sake, Polonius is simply
worried lest Ophelia will "tender \[him\] a fool" by allowing herself to
be seduced (1.3.33-44, 1.3.109). Whereas Laertes and Ophelia are driven
by love and a sense of mutual obligation to correspond regularly,
Polonius's disapproval of borrowing and lending \--"for loan oft loses
both itself and friend"\-- shows a complete failure to understand the
ways in which gratitude can cement a close friendship (1.3.2-4,
1.3.75-77). As the play unfolds Polonius's cool concern with his own
status is shown to be typical of the political world.

It is significant that the spirited ghost and the chaste Ophelia both
conform perfectly to the conventional code of honor as it relates to
their respective genders. In both cases their virtue is disruptive, but
in almost opposite ways, since the demands of the political and personal
worlds are themselves opposite: whereas Ophelia allows her sense of duty
to destroy her chance to find fulfilment in a loyal relationship, the
noble and spirited insistence of the ghost that Hamlet "remember" his
murder threatens to destabilize the reign of a king who has already
proved himself to be prudent and efficient. One may infer that, whereas
the conventional code of honor seems shallow when compared to a lover's
devotion, it is at the same time too loyally constant to be compatible
with the fickle world of politics.

The ghost is, however, passionate as well as honourable: his opening
condemnation of Claudius turns out to be no more than a brief preamble
to his sad reflections on Gertrude's inconstancy and her preference for
his brother's "wit and gifts" (1.5.42-57). Although he appears in
"complete steel" and "warlike form," has a "martial stalk" and insists
initially that his object is revenge, his central demand is not in fact
that Hamlet should kill Claudius, and indeed not necessarily that he
should take any sort of violent action at all; rather, he is to prevent
the "royal bed" from becoming "a couch for luxury and damned
incest...howsomever \[he\] pursues this act" (1.4.52, 1.1.47, 1.1.66,
1.5.7, 1.5.25, 1.5.82-84). Although he may have been driven from
purgatory by the pain of Gertrude's beyrayal, it is ironic that time and
the ghost's underlying attachment to the queen seem to have moderated
any urge he may originally have felt to punish her: his "countenance is
more in sorrow than in anger" according to the observant Horatio, and he
orders Hamlet not to "contrive against \[his\] mother aught"
(1.2.231-32, 1.5.85-86). His attitude to Gertrude shows that in the long
run calm sadness or pity is the natural response to the loss of a
beloved, but one can infer from his threatening appearance and initial
emphasis on vengeance that he would rather see himself as driven mainly
by a fierce desire to punish Claudius than resign himself to such
humiliating passivity. Shakespeare draws on the traditional view of
unquiet and unpurged spirits to suggest that the ghost's behavior is
unnatural and perverse: not only is his noble anger likely to be
politically disruptive, but it conflicts with his own concern for
Gertrude's welfare in the end, since his desire to purify "the royal
bed" seems likely hurt the queen as much as the king. In reality,
however, the gentle sympathy which he feels for Gertrude constitutes a
deeper form of constancy than his spirited determination to remember and
punish injustice.

Shakespeare is concerned in act 1 to portray Hamlet as passionate, noble
and thoughtful in equal measure. He resembles the ghost himself in that
his intense bitterness regarding Gertrude's behavior overshadows his
honourable desire to punish Claudius for usurpation and murder, even
though it is the latter motive which officially drives his revenge.[^4]
Thus it is no surprise that Hamlet's first instinct after hearing the
ghost's revelation is to ignore the injunction not to "taint" his mind
against the "pernicious" Gertrude, whom the ghost has now exposed as an
adulteress (1.5.85-86, 1.5.105).[^5] Nevertheless, Hamlet's austere
criticism of the annual revels, which, he maintains, lead Denmark to be
"traduc'd and tax'd of other nations," demonstrates that he too is noble
as well as passionate (1.4.18, 1.4.23-38). In this aristocratic society
of Christianized Vikings the prince has clearly been brought up to
respect proud spiritedness as the key male virtue. Shakespeare uses
Hamlet's critique of the revels to hint for the first time at the
artificiality of this noble code, which may condemn "some vicious mole
of nature" even though "nature cannot choose his origin" (1.4.24-26). In
an effort to conform to the fierce imperatives of this code Hamlet
initially attempts to force himself into a violent hatred of Claudius by
repeatedly calling him a "villain," but when the crisis has passed he
reveals that his real state of mind is much less spirited, as he broods
resentfully on the "cursed spite" that he "was born to set...right" a
"time \[which\] is out of joint" (1.5.106-08, 1.5.188-89). Thus the
ghost's appeal to Hamlet's sense of shame \--he would prove himself to
be "duller than the fat weed that roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf"
should he "not stir in this"\-- falls on fertile ground, since the
prince's noble virtue will lead him to feel that he must attempt to
punish and reform corruption, regardless of his own natural inclinations
(1.5.91-111, 1.5.32-34). Hamlet's nobility should therefore be seen as a
second driving force in his character, completely separate from his
passionate reaction to his mother's disloyalty.

The third element in Hamlet's soul is revealed by his request to "go
back to school," which is contrasted with Laertes's wish to return to
France to live the life of a fashionable young gentleman (1.2.112-13,
1.2.50-56; see also 2.1.53-59). Hamlet's unexpected and bathetic
recourse to his "tables" after the ghost has vanished seems more likely
to calm him down than psyche him up, while the similes which he uses to
express his apparently fierce determination to "with wings as swift as
meditation or the thoughts of love...sweep to \[his\] revenge" remind us
of his innate thoughtfulness even as he is consciously determining to
act (1.5.107, 1.5.29-31). It is Hamlet's calculating side which takes
over after seeing the ghost with a characteristically dizzying
abruptness, as he prudently swears his companions to secrecy while
planning to adopt an "antic disposition," or pretence of madness
(1.5.119-80). Whereas Ophelia capitulated to paternal authority and
conventional conceptions of honour and duty, Hamlet's behavior suggests
a much more thoughtful, and indeed Horatio-like, determination to mull
over his father's demands.

Overall in act 1 the unusually obtrusive back story that is one of the
play's most distinctive elements invites an audience to wonder whether
it would be better to resist change or surrender to it. The ghost's and
Hamlet's insistence that they will "remember" is imprudent, since such
obdurate constancy seems likely to disrupt the reign of an efficient
king, but on the other hand Horatio, and indeed Hamlet himself, show a
capacity for loyalty that seems deeply endearing, especially when
contrasted with the fickle court (1.5.91-104). This contrast implies
that the priorities of the political and the personal spheres are
absolutely opposed; whereas efficient statesmen seem to be prudently
fickle, true lovers are distinguished by their passionate loyalty. Codes
of honor or virtue can confuse the two worlds, however, encouraging
spirited constancy in politics while discouraging the fidelity of
lovers. Horatio, who has no noble principles, models an effective
balance between the two spheres, coolly manipulating his acquaintances
in order to promote civic order, but in the end prioritizing his
relationship with Hamlet even over his political prudence. Polonius of
all people summarizes this discriminating approach, albeit in simplistic
form, when he advises Laertes not to utter or act on "unproportion'd
thought," but to "grapple" his few "tried" friends to his "soul with
hoops of steel," while remaining merely "familiar, but by no means
vulgar" with "each new-hatch'd, unfledged courage" (1.3.59-65).

In act 1 Shakespeare also introduces an important exception to the
lover's passionate loyalty: one would not have to agree fully with
Claudius's arguments for controlling grief through reason to feel that
it might be natural for the "hoops" of friendship to loosen in the
course of time after the loss of a beloved through death or inconstancy.
The calm pity which the ghost feels for Gertrude represents his natural
response, but his insistence that the "royal bed of Denmark" be purified
illustrates the tendency of the noble man to override such humiliatingly
passive feelings. Not only could the ghost disrupt the state through his
noble obduracy, but he tortures himself needlessly when he could have
aligned himself with the deeper, gentler constancy of the true lover.
All these points are also true of Hamlet's relationship with Gertrude
and so are developed further as the play goes on. Shakespeare presents
Hamlet as epitomizing the human capacity for thought, nobility and
passion \--a "courtier's, soldier's, scholar's eye, tongue, sword"\-- in
order to explore how each of these qualities contributes to, or
obstructs, loyal friendship on the one hand and, on the other, the
inconstant prudence of the politician (3.1.151). He structures the play
around these three qualities, concentrating on passion in act 2,
nobility or virtue in act 3 and thought in acts 4 and 5.

At the start of act 2 Shakespeare expands on the contrasts between the
political and the personal spheres, juxtaposing Hamlet's method of
gauging Ophelia's loyalty, which is to burst indecorously into her room
and simply scrutinise her face closely, as if he "would draw it," with
Polonius's devious plan to assess Laertes's behaviour in France
(2.1.6-65, 2.1.84-88). Whereas Hamlet's yearning for passionate
constancy dictates his direct methods \--typically, his disguise, or
"antic disposition," in contrast to the "trappings and the suits" of the
court, serves precisely to liberate him from the demands of
convention\-- Polonius's concern for the status of his family is shown
to be compatible with the most unscrupulous strategies. The latter's
habitual, cool detachment is evident in his dispassionate analysis of
Hamlet's fervent love letters, which he reads aloud to the king in order
to prove that his daughter is the cause of the prince's madness
(2.2.110-51). He comments only on the style of Hamlet's love poems,
which certainly show more passion than art, and seems unable to speak
without using some elaborate rhetorical device. We can see Polonius's
limitations when he dismisses the tragic climax of the Trojan play as
"too long" and is merely embarrassed by the way in which the actor has
"turn'd his color and has tears in's eyes" (2.2.498, 2.2.519-20).

Because of his innate coolness, the fickle world of politics is
Polonius's natural element, as it is Claudius's. Polonius is dominated
by his immoderate ambition, which is both concealed and promoted by a
prudent self-restraint that leaves no room for intimate attachments. The
mask almost drops at one point, when he becomes obdurately intent on
promoting the very match which he earlier forbade Ophelia to
contemplate, as soon as he realizes that he might be able to use what he
now sees as the prince's desperate devotion to his daughter to advance
his own status (2.1.98-16, 3.1.176-78). His typically disingenuous claim
to have forbidden Ophelia to consort with a "prince out of thy star"
actually serves to highlight his ambition, for it was in fact Laertes
who made this point \--and in the process wisely acknowledged that
Hamlet could be a serious lover\-- while Polonius took the prince's
inconstancy for granted and could never bring himself to admit that his
daughter's social inferiority was a factor in the situation (compare
2.2.141-42, 1.3.14-28, 1.3.117-23).

The differing motives which drive Claudius and Gertrude to employ
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to spy on Hamlet highlight the fundamental
disjunction between the personal and the political world. It is clear
that the Queen loves Hamlet: she "beseech\[es\]" these old school
friends "instantly to visit \[her\] too much changed son," whom she
refers to as a "poor wretch," and shows a sympathetic and guilty
understanding that the cause of his madness is "his father's death and
\[their\] overhasty marriage" (2.2.19-26, 2.2.56-57, 2.2.168). In
contrast, the king clearly primes Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to draw
the prince out on the issue of thwarted ambition (2.2.252-62). Later the
queen's simple sincerity is contrasted with the machinations of Claudius
and Polonius, as she expresses a heartfelt hope that marriage to Ophelia
might cure her son's madness (3.1.37-41). Both Polonius and Claudius use
the same pragmatic strategies in their personal relationships as they do
in their public life. Polonius's tactics of tricking his son's
acquaintances into informing against him and using his daughter to
expose the causes of the prince's agitation are echoed in Claudius's
employment of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to spy on Hamlet and his
cunning decision to involve Gertrude in the plan to find a "remedy" for
his affliction, while the way in which Claudius disguises his
self-protective intentions may remind us of Polonius's pretense that his
matchmaking is motivated by a concern to cure the madness that "all we
mourn for" (2.2.17-18, 2.2.146-51). The intense ambition which drives
these two characters finds its fulfillment in the political sphere,
whereas the prince's yearning for loyalty and intimacy constantly leads
him to behave in a way that clashes with his public role.

The King's misreading of Hamlet's motives may remind us of Polonius's
tendency to "cast beyond" the truth in an overly cautious way, which
causes him to ignore the signs that the prince is sincerely attached to
his daughter (2.1.110-14). Claudius and Polonius both assume that Hamlet
shares their own desire for power and status, whereas in reality it is
only in characters like themselves that pride floats free of any
moderating codes and attachments, limited only by cautious calculation
as to the best means of self-advancement. In fact all three of Hamlet's
main characteristics play a part in rendering him unusually unambitious:
his pride manifests itself purely as virtuous nobility and he treats the
prestige of high office with witty and increasingly philosophical
scepticism; but above all he is too full of an erotic yearning for loyal
intimacy to be at all interested in politics (2.2.263-64).

The pious Hamlet, who is himself intransigently constant as we have
seen, can only make sense of the fickleness of the court by considering
it "more than natural," perhaps even diabolic, but the truth seems to be
that he has simply underrated the extent to which hearts less passionate
than his own are swayed by shallower considerations (2.2.366-68).
Significantly \--and in fact highly unusually for Shakespeare\-- both of
the play's female characters are relatively passive, while Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern are so colourless as to be practically interchangeable
(2.2.33-34). One of the elements which gives the play its distinctive
character is the large group of well-meaning, yet weak characters who
form sincere attachments, but lack true constancy. All three of the key
motives that drive the action of the play \--namely, honor, passion and
prudence\-- are shown to play a role in distracting such characters from
their own deeper loyalties. As we have seen, it is Ophelia's sense of
honor and deference to her father which lead her to break off her affair
with Hamlet, while Gertrude is driven to infidelity primarily by the
sensual intensity of her attachment to Claudius (1.4.53-57, 3.4.82-95).
Most intriguingly, when Rosencrantz cites as his motive for spying on
Hamlet his worry that "ten thousand lesser things" would be drawn into
"the boist'rous ruin" if the king were to be killed, he is making an
entirely prudent point, which I will argue even echoes Shakespeare's own
political teaching as reflected in the Trojan speech, but nevertheless,
he too appears abjectly fickle when measured against the standards set
by Horatio, who finds himself in exactly the same situation as Hamlet's
old school friends, but remains scrupulously loyal to the prince,
regardless of his disruptive behavior (3.3.11-23).

Whatever their individual priorities, Ophelia, Gertrude and Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern resemble each other in their passive compliance with
the demands of the conventional hierarchies. Rosencrantz's rueful remark
that Claudius and Gertrude could have "put \[their\] dread pleasures
more into command than to entreaty" when asking them to spy on their old
school friend suggests that he sees himself \--or wishes to see
himself\-- as forced to accede to the royal request, and Guildenstern
agrees that they are bound to "obey" an implicit order, although he
almost immediately conceals this thought, blandly assuring Claudius that
they are throwing themselves wholeheartedly and "freely" into the
project (2.2.26-32). In the same way, Ophelia probably sees herself as
compelled to obey her father's orders in full, while Gertrude slides
easily into a second marriage, once the "better wisdoms" of the court
have approved its political expediency (1.2.15-16). Even though these
characters are more complex than the Player King's cynical analysis of
an endemic inconstancy will later suggest, their actions nevertheless
support his view that "fortune \[leads\] love" rather than the reverse:
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern "shall receive such thanks as fits a king's
remembrance;" Gertrude's relationship with Claudius clearly allows her
to retain her status as queen; while it would normally be very much in
Ophelia's interest to preserve her reputation for chastity, as Laertes
points out (3.2.203, 2.2.25-26, 1.3.29-44). Rather than being abjectly
bent on self-advancement, however, these characters simply lack the
depth of passion to maintain truly constant relationships and so allow
society's demands and compensations to override their personal
attachments in a more or less passive manner.

Nevertheless, these shallower characters are still swayed by their
deeper feelings, even though they attempt to override them: in the end
Ophelia regrets bitterly her decision to reject her lover, comparing
herself to the "baker's daughter" who was turned into an owl for
spurning Christ's offer of bread, while Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are
shamed into "a kind of confession in \[their\] looks" when Hamlet
discovers their duplicity and appeals to the "obligation of our
ever-preserv'd love" (4.5.42-43, 2.2.278-92). Gertrude "lives almost by
\[Hamlet's\] looks" and has probably been plagued by guilt regarding the
"black and grained spots" of her adulterous affair and "o'erhasty
marriage" right from the start of the play, when the ghost astutely
urged the prince to leave her to the "thorns that in her bosom lodge,"
which "prick and sting her" (4.7.11-12, 3.4.89-91, 2.2.56-57,
1.5.87-88). Even Claudius himself shows in the end that he is unable to
ignore his deeper ties completely, as he rushes from the play in order
to pray for forgiveness for having committed an act which he
acknowledges is instinctively repulsive or "rank," since it has "the
primal eldest curse upon't" (3.2.265-70, 3.3.36-38). All these
characters pay a heavy emotional price for turning away from their
deeper sympathies and attachments. If one contrasts them with Horatio,
who, as we shall see, is ultimately rewarded for his loyalty by gaining
Hamlet's complete trust, one can find the radical implication that
sensual passion, honourable virtue and even prudent thought are only
truly valuable insofar as they can regulated by, and subordinated to, an
intransigent determination to remain constant to one's intimate friends
in the face of all dangers and temptations.

Hamlet confronts Rosencrantz and Guildenstern directly and, once they
have confessed to spying, he rewards them with an honest, if incomplete,
account of his depression (2.2.293-308). Hamlet is not naïve, but his
priorities are simply not political: his measured account of his own
sadness allows the audience to contrast the prince's world of deep and
enduring feeling with the fickleness of the court, who "would make
mouths at \[Claudius\] while \[Hamlet's\] father liv'd," but who now
"give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in
little" (2.2.363-66). At the same time the calm coherence of this speech
suggests that his initial shock and grief have by now naturally subsided
into a more distanced sadness, where he is no longer yearning for
"self-slaughter," but has merely "lost all...mirth, forgone all custom
of exercises" (2.2.295-97; compare 1.2.129-32). This relative calmness
is more to do with the passage of time than any deliberate attempt at
self-restraint along the lines advocated by Claudius: Hamlet is aware
that "there is nothing good or bad, but thinking makes it so," and that
man is in reality "noble in reason...infinite in faculties," but these
insights do nothing to lessen his current conviction that humanity is a
mere "quintessence of dust" (2.2.249-51, 2.2.303-08).

Not only Hamlet would have to fire himself up artificially to keep his
promise to the ghost, but such noble constancy would seem deeply
incongruous with a political world which is ruled by ambition and
prudence (1.5.95-104). As the act progresses, there are growing signs
that the young prince himself is reflecting on the impracticality of his
vow to take revenge: the odd phrasing of his prediction that the popular
young actors who are threatening to supersede the older group who have
just arrived in Elsinore "exclaim against their own succession," because
their own voices will eventually also break, seems to hint at the risks
involved in killing Claudius, since revenge would be seen as usurpation
and so would be likely to destabilize the monarchy (2.2.338-44).

The speech that Hamlet now asks to hear addresses the same themes, but
in a particularly oblique way, for the prince's comment that it was only
valued by the few with real judgement, and was "set down with as much
modesty as cunning" \--so much so in fact that "it was never acted, or
if it was, not above once"\-- may be taken as a hint that there are
strong reasons at this point for proceeding with the argument indirectly
(2.2.434-40). The lines which Hamlet has the actor recite deal with the
siege of Troy; surely the most famous example of a military action
inspired purely by passion and honor. The play portrays Pyrrhus as a
villain rampaging around Troy with his "black complexion smear'd ...with
blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons," even though his
determination to seek vengeance is entirely honourable (2.2.450-64). He
finds Priam, the Trojan king, but "in rage strikes wide," at which point
the city topples to the ground, "seeming to feel this blow," thus
distracting Pyrrhus with the "hideous crash" from his assault on the old
king, so that his sword "seem'd i' th' air to stick," and he himself,
"as a painted tyrant," or, "like a neutral to his will and matter, did
nothing" (2.2.468-82). If, as appears likely, Hamlet is implicitly
comparing himself to Pyrrhus as he hesitates before avenging an act of
adultery, the image of a ruined Troy must surely hint at a very natural
reluctance on his part to cause a civil war in Denmark for the sake of a
personal vendetta.

Hamlet has good cause to worry about the fragility of the political
situation, for we learn later that Claudius himself has been forced to
refrain from punishing his nephew for Polonius's murder because he is so
"lov'd of the distracted multitude" that they would blame "th'offender's
scourge" and "never the offense" (4.3.3-7). This implies that those who
see the prince as "the glass of fashion and the mould of form" still
resent the way in which he has been denied the throne (3.1.153). One may
infer from Fortinbras's assumption that the state is "weak...disjoint
and out of frame" because of old Hamlet's death, not to mention from the
ease with which even Laertes is able to drum up support for a "rebellion
\[that\] looks so giant-like" in order to avenge Polonius's death, that
Denmark is in danger of splitting into a number of factions (1.2.20,
4.5.122). As we have seen, when Rosencrantz compares the king to a
"massy wheel" with "huge spokes...which when it falls, each small
annexment, petty consequence, attends the boist'rous ruin," concluding
that "never alone did the King sigh, but with a general groan," he is
making precisely the same point as the Trojan speech, as interpreted
above, and indeed using almost the same metaphor of a general "ruin" to
portray the political repercussions of regicide (3.3.17-23).

The Trojan speech also hints at another argument for restraint, which
has nothing to do with politics. If the above interpretation of the
Trojan play is correct, then the moving description of Hecuba mourning
her husband \--sufficiently pitiful to make "milch the burning eyes of
heaven"\-- suggests that Hamlet's real attitude to Gertrude is by now as
moderate and sympathetic as that of the ghost (2.2.513-18). In the first
two acts, in direct contrast to the rest of the play, Hamlet treats
inconstancy gently. Even early on in the play, when there is no doubt
that he is shocked and revolted by his mother's fickleness, he promises
that he will "in all \[his\] best obey" her when she asks him not to go
back to university, and he merely sighs sadly in his silent visit to
Ophelia's chamber, rather than blaming her for her infidelity (1.2.120,
2.1.91-93). He makes a typically direct, emotional appeal to Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern, "conjur\[ing\]" his old friends \--to whom there is
no-one "he more adheres"\-- "by the rights of our fellowship, by the
consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserv'd love"
to be honest with him and admit that they "were sent for," and, after he
has forced them to confess their mission, even feeds them just enough
information to ensure that they stay in Claudius's favor (2.2.20-21,
2.2.283-86, 2.2.293-95).

In act 2 Shakespeare concentrates on the gulf between the passionate man
and a fickle, political world. Whereas politicians and weaker or cooler
characters who surrender themselves to inconstancy thrive in this world,
albeit at the expense of their own "heart's core," the passionate man
prioritizes his deep attachments, but may therefore approach politics in
an imprudently direct and open manner. Hamlet's interest in the play
shows, however, that he has sympathies which run deeper than his
spirited concern for justice: he requests the Trojan play not only
because it is "passionate," but also because it is "set down with as
much modesty as cunning" (2.2.432-45). Deep attachments contain their
own moderating principle, while the considered response of the
passionate soul to a fickle political world is compassionate.

Shakespeare uses the two major soliloquies which follow the Trojan
speeches to shift the focus of his argument from passionate to noble
constancy. Although Hamlet's assertion that the player would "drown the
stage with tears,...cleave the general ear with horrid speech" and
"appall the free, confound the ignorant," if he had his own
"motive...for passion," does come close for the first and last time in
the play to acknowledging openly the potentially explosive repercussions
of any direct action against Claudius, this insight is almost completely
overshadowed by the prince's explicit aim in the soliloquy, which is to
shame himself into taking revenge by contrasting his own "dull and
muddy-mettled" behaviour with the noble eloquence of the actor
(2.2.560-87). On this overt level he presents the situation to himself
as a simple test of his manly honor, equivalent to being called a
"villain," or being "tweak\[ed\] by the nose," even though he must know
that Claudius would never respond to a direct challenge (2.2.571-75).
Again he attempts to work himself up artificially into a state of mind
in which he can take decisive action, as he did immediately after seeing
the ghost: "remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain"
(2.2.581). The baffled and exasperated way in which he wonders whether
he is "pigeon-livered and lack\[ing\] gall" shows the power of the
gentlemanly code to alienate Hamlet from his own real feelings,
rendering his prudent compassion too shameful to be acknowledged
(2.2.576-77). Nevertheless, the fact that he uses an actor's speech to
illustrate honourable conduct seems to imply an acknowledgement on his
part that a noble man might have to "force his soul" to create an
artificial "dream of passion" and "all for nothing" (2.2.550-60).
Whereas we have seen that the deepest passions are innately moderate,
honor prides itself on its intransigent spiritedness.

Towards the end of the soliloquy Hamlet abandons his extravagant
self-castigation with characteristic abruptness and develops a
thoughtful plan to use the players to prove, or even flush out,
Claudius's guilt (2.2.588-605). He gives no reason here for not having
already "fatted all the region kites with this slave's offal," but by
changing the subject makes a silent admission that the situation cannot
be resolved by the simple duel for which his upbringing has prepared him
(2.2.579-80). Since he has shown no previous sign of doubting the ghost,
it seems likely that Hamlet's plan is mainly designed to allow him to
procrastinate with a good conscience, while at the back of his mind he
is clearly hoping that it might even enable him to avoid taking any sort
of direct action, since Claudius might become one of those who "have
proclaim'd their malefactions" when they have seen them represented in a
"cunning...scene" (2.2.588-94). Again, however, the prince's shame at
his own inaction leads him to keep this possibility in the background
and present the plan primarily as a way of testing the ghost's story
before taking revenge in the most straightforwardly noble manner: "if 'a
do blench, I know my course" (2.2.597-98). These ambiguities, which
characterize all of Hamlet's remaining soliloquies, show how his code of
honor leads him to censor his real thoughts.

In the "to be or not to be" speech Hamlet treats the subject of suicide
in a much more measured way than in his first soliloquy, where he
expressed a truly desperate yearning for "self-slaughter" (1.2.129-32).
As with the previous soliloquy, he focuses on virtuous rather than
passionate motives for action: his question is whether it would be
"*nobler* to take arms" \[my italics\] against his own life than simply
"to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune" (3.1.55-59). In
the end the prince chooses prudent passivity over spirited virtue, but
at the same time, with characteristic deference to his noble code,
blames himself for allowing "enterprises of great pitch and moment
\[to\] turn awry and lose the name of action" through being "sicklied
o'er by the pale cast of thought" (3.1.82-87). Here Hamlet's portrayal
of self-destruction as an example of 'healthy,' virtuous action opposing
the ills of the world seems odd to say the least, since suicide would of
course only "end" Hamlet's *feeling* that he is shamefully inactive,
while the "sea of troubles" itself would continue unabated. The
soliloquy implies, however, that this might also be true of more
conventionally noble attempts to oppose corruption, since "the
oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pangs of despis'd
love...the spurns that patient merit of th'unworthy take" clearly
constitute an overwhelming "sea" of corruption and inconstancy, which
would be unaffected by the actions of any individual, however virtuous
(3.1.70-73). On the deepest level of the play I would therefore argue
that Hamlet's putative revenge is used to illustrate what one might call
the narcissism of virtue: for the noble man any action, however futile
or destructive, which makes him feel that he is "tak\[ing\] arms"
against injustice is preferable to shameful passivity.[^6]

The indirectness of this soliloquy is typical of the moments when the
prince comes closest to analysing his own inaction: Hamlet distances
both himself and the audience from the issues raised in the Trojan
speech, not only by using the classical analogy, but literally, by
inviting the player to recite it, while in the "rogue and peasant slave"
soliloquy we have seen that the prince's scornful attitude to his own
prudent thoughts leads him to relegate them to a subversive
undercurrent, running directly counter to the stream of self-criticism
that dominates the soliloquy (2.2.550-87). The ambiguous analogies of
suicide and acting help Shakespeare to conceal his thought. The fact
that revenge is not the explicit subject of the third soliloquy at all
means that the arguments against "taking arms" to punish Claudius which
presumably parallel Hamlet's fear of the afterlife are never clarified.
Although unusually direct \--albeit under the cover of the suicide
analogy\-- in favoring cautious inaction, this soliloquy resembles the
previous one in that "the native hue of resolution" is made to seem much
more attractive than "the pale cast of thought" even as it is rejected
in the argument (3.1.56-59, 3.1.82-87). Shakespeare's underlying
implication that it would be wiser simply to "suffer" the murder of
one's father is bound to offend against any standard of justice, whether
modern or Elizabethan. Reluctant, no doubt, to provoke his audience, or
to criticize in any explicit way codes which in many contexts help to
promote social stability, Shakespeare uses Hamlet's attempts to repress
his prudent thoughts to conceal his own deeper meaning.

Whereas we have seen that time and compassion have moderated the
passionate grief which oppressed Hamlet most intensely at the start of
the play, his noble code almost defines itself by its obdurate rigidity
and explicitly opposes "the pale cast of thought" as unhealthily
timorous (3.1.82-84). Since Hamlet presents suicide as just one example
of noble action, the implication is that he might eventually feel duty
bound to "take arms" against corruption in a more conventional manner,
as he becomes progressively more ashamed of his inaction. This would be
constancy writ large as a moral or political end, since it would involve
not only punishing "th'oppressor's wrong" but presumably even avenging
"the pangs of despis'd love...and the spurns that patient merit of
th'unworthy takes" (3.1.70-73). Taken together, the second and third
soliloquies suggest that Hamlet's noble principles are too deeply
instilled to be easily resisted. In act 3 Shakespeare goes on to show
the disruptive effects of the prince's virtue.

Hamlet's response to Ophelia, whom he encounters immediately after his
soliloquy, should be divided into three stages. He greets her gently at
first, asking to be remembered in her prayers; then responds with
understandable anger when she attempts to return his gifts; and finally,
almost certainly after realizing that Polonius and the king are
eavesdropping, curses her with a startling vehemence (3.1.88-89,
3.1.102-14, 3.1.129-46). I would suggest that his first two responses
are sincerely passionate, but that the third is deliberately
manufactured as part of his "antic disposition." The cruelty of Hamlet's
curse, which clearly hurts Ophelia deeply, represents a radical change
of approach, indicating that the prince is prepared to prioritize his
noble mission over his real feelings (3.1.150-61). His nobility is
highly imprudent as well as inhumane, since it is his decision to goad
Claudius by predicting that "all but one" of those currently married
"shall live" which prompts the king to develop a typically cool and
efficient plan to have him sent to England to be killed (3.1.148-49,
3.1.167-70).[^7]

Although Hamlet is driven to attack Ophelia so vehemently, his real
state of mind is implied by his advice to the actor: "in the
very...whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
temperance that may give it smoothness" (3.2.5-8). In a long and
important eulogy of Horatio, he praises the way in which his friend's
"blood and judgment are so well co-meddled, that \[he is\] not a pipe
for Fortune's finger to sound what stop she please," which means that
"in suff'ring all \[he\] suffers nothing," and so avoids becoming
"passion's slave" (3.2.66-72). "Suff'ring" is now redefined as
deliberate stoicism; an attitude adopted by the wise man to preserve his
equanimity in a corrupt and inconstant world. Horatio is not, however,
coolly fickle like Polonius or Claudius: his "judgment" does not rule
his "blood," but is "so well co-meddl'd" with it as to enable him to
distinguish and cultivate potential friends, even as he holds himself
aloof from his more superficial acquaintances (3.2.68-69). Hamlet's
intimacy with Horatio, which grows steadily in a world where almost
every other passion seems to fade, shows friendship to be a solid and
lasting good, capable of fulfilling our deepest longings. His decision,
made when his soul could first "distinguish her election," to "wear"
Horatio "in \[his\] heart's core, ay, in \[his\] heart of heart" is
based on a careful \--and indeed accurate\-- judgement of his friend's
character as exceptionally "just" (3.2.63-65, 3.2.73, 3.2.54-5). It is
in the context of such a friendship, and in this context alone, that
complete fidelity is not only natural but essential. The true tragedy of
the play is that Hamlet could have found fulfilment in this enclave of
constancy, but is driven instead to engage with a fickle world.

The dialogue between the Player King and the Player Queen allows
Shakespeare to focus directly on the discussion of the limits of
constancy which underlies the play. The Player King tells his wife that,
despite her vows to the contrary, she will disengage from him easily
when he dies, since society is ruled by prudent self-interest rather
than passion, while such genuine attachments as do exist are
intrinsically fleeting; the "passion ending doth the purpose lose," just
as "mellow" fruit "fall\[s\] unshaken" from the tree (3.2.188-209). One
cannot dismiss the Player King's meditations: not only does he describe
the fickle world of the court accurately, but there are similarities
between his position and that of Horatio, who "suffers all," and indeed
that of Hamlet himself, who has, as we have seen, more than half a mind
simply to endure an overwhelming "sea" of injustice and ingratitude
rather than attempting to reform society. The king may be right about
society in general, but he surely underrates the constancy of true
lovers, for, unlike Gertrude, the dumb show queen makes "passionate
action" when she "finds the king dead" and responds in a "harsh and
unwilling" manner to the blandishments of his poisoner (see the stage
directions which follow 3.2.135). Although the Player Queen is also
faithful, it appears that she is overrating her own ability to remain
constant after her husband's death when she makes her great oath of
loyalty, since she does eventually accept the murderer as her lover
(3.2.175-85, 3.2.216-233, 3.2.263-64). The idealistic queen has, I would
suggest, failed to reckon with the fact that her fidelity has always
been rooted in the actual experience of love. This does not demonstrate
that all passions are fleeting or that "fortune \[leads\] love" in the
play as a whole, for not only is Horatio as faithful as the Player
Queen, but Hamlet's own loyalty to his lowly friend is, as he points
out, completely unaffected by considerations of "pomp" or "thrift"
(3.2.203, 3.2.56-62). Rather, the suggestion is that after the death of
a beloved the intensity of even the truest lover's loyal attachment will
eventually fade in some measure, however deeply he mourns his loss.

Shakespeare presents attempts to perpetuate loyalty beyond this natural
limit as motivated by honourable virtue rather than passion: Hamlet's
own determination to use the play within the play to trigger his
mother's guilt is a case in point, since he seems to have decided that
the noblest option is to remain loyal to a memory of close knit family
life and to attempt to force Gertrude to do the same, even though there
is evidence, not just in the Hecuba speech but, I will argue, throughout
act 3, that his original grief and anger are now giving way to a calm
pity (3.2.181, 3.2.224, 3.2.229-31). The implication is that the
passionate and thoughtful man should steer a course between the Player
King's cynical resignation to a pervasive fickleness and his queen's
noble protestations of enduring love, allowing his own innate qualities
of "blood and judgment" to determine the extent of his constancy. Thus
Horatio combines absolute loyalty to his friend with a cool, pragmatic
approach to an inconstant world and, as I shall argue later, an
unsentimental recognition that Hamlet's death brings all his obligations
to the prince to an abrupt end. In act 3, in contrast with Horatio,
Hamlet nobly refuses to resign himself either to personal loss or to
society's pervasive fickleness, although the fact that he requests
\--and indeed helps to write\-- a play in which the arguments for
thoughtful "suff'ring" are given their full weight suggests that a part
of him still doubts the value of his own virtuous constancy
(2.2.540-45).

As one might expect, Horatio does not share his friend's exultation when
the play within the play has proved Claudius's guilt; in fact his only
responses are to point out that the plan has been no more than "half" a
success (perhaps because Claudius stopped short of revealing his guilt
publicly, thus obviating the need for direct action on Hamlet's part)
and that he has failed to complete the rhyme in his impromptu poem
comparing the king to a peacock --a traditional emblem of pride and lust
(3.2.275-85). The latter criticism is implicitly directed at Hamlet's
moralizing approach, since the expected rhyme-word, which is clearly
"ass" rather than "peacock," would have implied that Claudius should be
mocked as a fool rather than condemned as a knave.[^8]

When Hamlet refrains from killing Claudius as he prays, the pretext he
offers for rejecting the opportunity \--that murdering him at this point
might represent "hire and salary, not revenge" since it might lead to
his "salvation" in Heaven\-- seems designed to appear honourably
vengeful rather than prudent, but in fact the savage vindictiveness of
the thought serves to reduce the revenge ethic to absurdity (3.3.89-95).
Although the moral stance which Hamlet adopts contrasts sharply with
Horatio's detachment, it is significant that his actual behavior is
fairly restrained. His deeply ambivalent attitude to revenge is implied
in his presentation of himself as a Pyrrhus-like warrior, who strikes at
"witching time," and "drinks hot blood," and in his insistence during
the performance of the play within a play that the poisoner is the
king's nephew, rather than his brother as one might have expected
(3.2.388-92, 3.2.244).[^9]

Hamlet is less passionate than he seems when he confronts his mother: he
has hesitated for months before speaking to her and, in contrast with
his abrupt appearance in Ophelia's chamber earlier in the play, he
allows himself to be passively summoned to the queen's closet (3.2.128,
3.1.180-83, 3.2.311-12). Just before launching his verbal assault on his
mother, Hamlet prays that his "heart" should not "lose \[its\] nature,"
so that he is "cruel, \[but\] not unnatural" (3.2.393-95). What follows
is typically ambiguous:

I will speak daggers to her, but use none.

My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites---

How in my words somever she be shent,

To give them seals never my soul consent. (3.2.396-99)

At first one assumes that Hamlet's "soul" is possessed by a real desire
to "use" the daggers and therefore that his hypocrisy stems from an
unnatural self-restraint, but this is to ignore the fact that he has
twice spoken of his nature as a moderating influence. Moreover, if this
initial assumption is correct, then Hamlet would be employing "soul" in
two opposite senses in the same sentence, for when the word recurs in
such a curiously awkward manner it seems to refer to his moderate
nature. As is usual in Hamlet's soliloquies the less spirited meaning is
the one that should be pursued: rather than seeing the prince as finally
venting his intense pain in the closet scene and only just stopping
short of a physical assault on Gertrude, I will argue that we should
think of him as deliberately reinvigorating his residual grief and
anger, while ignoring his sympathetic "nature." His actions could be
seen as prudently honourable, since, if he manages to shame Gertrude
into avoiding his "uncle's bed," he will have kept his promise not to
let "the royal bed of Denmark be a couch for luxury," while avoiding the
disruptive consequences of a violent revenge (1.5.82-83, 3.4.157-70).

It is Hamlet's reaction to the sudden reappearance of the ghost which
provides the crucial evidence that his motives in this scene are
primarily noble rather than passionate. When the ghost appears, now
wearing a night-gown rather than armor, he announces that his
"visitation is but to whet \[Hamlet's\] almost blunted purpose"
\--presumably to exact a violent revenge\-- but in reality it is clear
that he has chosen to intervene at this moment to protect Gertrude, for
after this vague opening remark he focuses in detail on the queen's
confusion, begging the prince to show compassion for her "fighting soul"
(3.4.103-14). Ironically, it is the ghost who prioritizes his love for
Gertrude over his proud indignation at this point in the play, even at
the expense of interfering with Hamlet's attempt to fulfil his promise,
while the prince himself clings obdurately to his noble purpose. Hamlet
sheds light on his own behavior, not just in this scene but throughout
act 3, when he begs the ghost not to "convert \[his\] stern effects," so
that what he has "to do will want true color --tears perchance for
blood," since he implies here that his "color" of anger has been adopted
as a deliberate strategy and maintained with some effort in order to
shame his mother out of her inconstancy, when he would rather weep with
compassion (3.4.127-30). Later in the scene he tells the queen that he
"must be cruel to be kind" (3.4.178). All this suggests that the current
manifestation of the ghost, which is visible only to the prince, may
simply be a symptom of Hamlet's own suppressed compassion (3.4.131-39).

Thus, as one of the play's most astute critics puts it, "Hamlet's
tragedy is indeed the forced triumph of filial duty over sensitivity to
his own heart."[^10] The closet scene offers further evidence that the
prince now conceives of himself as on a "stern" moral mission to lambast
what he goes on to call "the fatness of these pursy times" (3.4.153).
This mission is dictated by his virtuous principles, which drive him to
work his passions up artificially beyond their natural pitch and forbid
him the relief that tears would bring, even though his real attitude to
his mother is by now similar to that of the ghost. Ironically, Hamlet's
intense sensitivity to shame, evident here in his immediate assumption
that the ghost has come "his tardy son to chide," will lead him to feel
that his current strategy is not sufficiently vengeful, even though one
might infer from Claudius's later reflections on the way in which "time
qualifies the spark and fire of \[love\]" that he has succeeded in
driving a wedge between the royal couple and so fulfilled his promise
(3.4.106-08, 4.7.111-18).

Even this relatively prudent and moderate achievement could be seen as
needlessly destructive, however. Hamlet merely triggers a dormant guilt
in Gertrude, reminding her of "black and grained spots" which she
acknowledges "will not leave their tinct," rather than forcing her, as
he affects to believe, into an artificially rigid determination to
"assume a virtue, if \[she\] have it not," and to use "custom" to
"change the stamp of nature" (3.4.89-91, 3.4.160-68). Gertrude makes
real attachments, but lacks sufficient depth of passion to remain
absolutely loyal: she says that her son has "cleft \[her\] heart in
twain" and for the rest of the play she does indeed show a dual
allegiance, devoting herself with an equal degree of desperate
determination to defending her husband and to keeping the secret of her
son's sanity (3.4.156, 4.5.129, 4.1.7-12, 5.1.284-88, 4.1.24-27,
3.4.181-88, 3.4.197-99). Hamlet's tirade leaves her in a state of
constant panic, convinced that her soul is "sick" (4.5.17-20).This shows
the futility, and indeed cruelty, of Hamlet's attempts to reform
characters who simply lack the depth of passion to align themselves
fully with the demands of their own heart. Moreover, in attempting to
treat the fickleness of his beloved mother as if it were a moral issue
he has allowed abstract principles of justice to alienate him from his
own "heart's core," where truly intimate attachments create enduring
mutual needs. He prevents himself from crying with some difficulty after
the ghost's intervention, as we have seen, and only acknowledges his
desire for reconciliation right at the end of the scene: "when you are
desirous to be blest, I'll blessing beg of you" (3.4.171-72).

When Hamlet stabs Polonius as he is hiding behind the arras in his
mother's room, he is clearly hoping to kill the king in direct response
to a shameful act of espionage (3.4.26). However, the extreme imprudence
of this sort of noble action becomes evident when it emerges that in the
current political climate even Polonius's death is nearly enough to
cause a civil war (4.5.112-22). Hamlet's unnaturally cold reaction to
his death is of the same calibre as his recent treatment of Gertrude and
Ophelia: he merely says that he will "lug the guts into the neighbour
room," while summing Polonius up, again in moral terms, as a "knave,"
albeit a "foolish prating" one (3.4.215). He sees his killing of
Polonius as justified, not only by the code of honor, but by the mission
that "heaven hath pleas'd...to punish \[him\] with," in which he must
play the role of God's "scourge and minister" (3.4.173-75). Hamlet's
religious faith has been a feature of his character from the start of
the play, when he contrasted his own belief in the supernatural with
Horatio's materialistic "philosophy" (1.5.166-7). Several of his
soliloquies reveal his belief in an afterlife, at least in the first
half of the play, while he habitually uses religious language when
castigating Gertrude and Ophelia (1.2.131-32, 3.1.59-81, 3.3.79-86,
3.1.120-49, 3.4.76-84, 3.4.161-72). In the closet scene, however, as in
the play as a whole, Shakespeare keeps his criticism of Hamlet's piety
and sense of honor indirect, and thus allows many in his audience to
welcome the prince's belated decision to "take arms" against a pervasive
fickleness.

Hamlet's next encounter with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern again
illustrates the futility, and indeed cruelty, of attempts to judge
innately weak characters by the highest standards. Whereas Hamlet seemed
straight-forwardly warm-hearted earlier in the play when he appealed to
"the rights of \[his\] fellowship" with his old school friends, he now
he dismisses his conversation with them as a "trade" and scorns
Rosencrantz's appeal to their former friendship in a way that seems
calculated to humiliate him (2.2.283-88, 3.2.334-36). The sharp contrast
between these two conversations shows how Hamlet's natural responses
have been distorted by his noble principles over the course of the play.
Ironically, the prince adapts the pipe image which he previously used to
convey his respect for Horatio's stoical self-control to express his
scorn (3.2.350-72, 3.2.68-71). Hamlet, it seems, can avoid becoming
"passion's slave," but his nobility is more obdurately persistent and
less amenable to thoughtful restraint than his passion. Despite showing
a clear understanding that the king is exerting pressure on his old
school friends, the prince still condemns them as "adders fang'd," just
as he attacked Ophelia even though he knew that she was acting on
Polonius's orders (2.2.293-95, 3.4.203, 2.2.181-86, 2.2.403-12). If one
compares his conversations with Ophelia and Gertrude, one can see that
he becomes increasingly harsh during act 3 as he strives to demonstrate
his own nobility.

Shakespeare has shown in act 3 that Hamlet's noble and pious principles
drive him to retain an artificial bitterness long after he should have
allowed his "purpose... \[to\] fall unshaken" like "mellow" fruit
(3.2.188-91). Whereas it is in the nature of intimate attachments to
demand high standards of loyalty, these standards are shown to be too
rigorous to be of any use in regulating a fickle society.

The play's examination of constancy and its limits is structured around
Hamlet's three key characteristics: having focused on passion in the
first two acts and honor in the third, Shakespeare concentrates in the
last two acts on thought itself. Having shown that passionate constancy
is alien to the political world in the second act, Shakespeare now
reverses his emphasis, highlighting the efficiency of prudent
politicians who are unfettered either by noble scruples or passionate
attachments. At the start of act 4 we are shown Claudius's prudent
ability to anticipate the opinions of "the distracted multitude," which
loves Hamlet to such an extent that "the offender's scourge \[would be\]
weigh'd" rather than "the offense" were he to try to punish the prince
for the murder of Polonius (4.3.4-7). The reasons for Claudius's delay
are revealed to be similar to Hamlet's own as implied in the Trojan
speech, for the king confesses to Laertes that his hands have been tied,
not only by the threat of civil war but by his love for Gertrude, who
"lives almost by \[Hamlet's\] looks" (4.7.11-25). These parallels
provide further evidence that Hamlet's delays are sensible, since the
prudent Claudius is nothing if not an effective politician.

In the end, however, Claudius's ultimate priorities are of course very
different from Hamlet's: he overrides his concern for Gertrude's
feelings, developing a plan to dispose of his nephew in an indirect
manner calculated to preserve political stability, simply by sending him
to England to have him killed, and ultimately even allows his wife to
drink poison rather than revealing his complicity in the plan to murder
the prince (4.3.58-68, 5.2.290). Claudius illustrates the pragmatic
insincerity of the political world when he dignifies the king of
England's fear of the "Danish sword" as "love" and disguises his own
prudent inconstancy as loyal patriotism, declaring that Hamlet's
"liberty is full of threats to all, to you yourself, to us, to everyone"
(4.3.58-61, 4.1.14-15). In contrast, the loyal and idealistic prince has
come to be considered too "dangerous" to be allowed to remain in Denmark
in such divided and "distracted" times, not just by Claudius, but also
by his "wisest friends;" presumably the "better wisdoms" who had earlier
supported Claudius's claim to the throne over Hamlet's (4.1.38-39,
4.3.1-11, 1.2.14-16).

Hamlet's philosophical nature comes to the fore in the last part of the
play. His four main soliloquies show the structure of Shakespeare's
argument, since the first focuses on passion, the second and third on
nobility and the fourth, concerning Fortinbras, on thought itself
(1.2.129-59, 2.2.550-87, 3.1.87, 4.4.32-46). In the latter soliloquy the
initial assumption seems to be that "godlike reason" must express itself
in pious and honourable action, but Hamlet then admits that thought
"quartered hath...ever three parts coward" and even notes that this
leaves "one part wisdom" (4.4.38-43).[^11] The prince drily mocks those
who are "puff'd" with "divine ambition" in his portrayal of Fortinbras's
assault on an insignificant piece of disputed ground in Poland, which is
undertaken for "no cause without," but simply to vent his noble desire
to avenge his father's death, and is likely to end in the "death of
twenty thousand men," who will die "for a fantasy and trick of fame"
(4.4.49, 4.4.25-29, 4.4.60-62). Hamlet's foregrounded aim in the
soliloquy is to present Fortinbras's very irrationality (and by
implication his own) as a guarantee of nobility \--he is willing to dare
all "for an egg-shell" or "a straw when honor's at the stake"\-- but
from another perspective the prince's emphasis on the insignificance of
the disputed territory highlights the wanton destructiveness of the
campaign (4.4.48-56). Hamlet himself draws the parallel to his own
mission, and the oddness of his phrasing when he refers to "a father
kill'd, a mother stain'd" as "excitements of...reason" serves to
reinforce the point that spirited anger is rarely rational.

The three major soliloquies on the subject of nobility are linked by the
way in which the examples of acting, suicide and pointless invasion
subvert Hamlet's official argument. The prince's emphasis has, however,
shifted in act 4: whereas in the "to be" soliloquy he chose thought
while favouring nobility, in the Fortinbras soliloquy he mocks nobility,
while resolving that "from this time forth \[his\] thoughts be bloody or
nothing worth" (4.4.65-66). From now on Hamlet becomes increasingly
unpredictable, as his increasingly philosophical mode of thought clashes
with his determination to allow his spirited sense of honor to rule his
actions.

Although Horatio's nature is more like Hamlet's than Claudius's, he
serves the king prudently and ignobly, gaining his trust to such an
extent that the wily king actually asks him to keep "good watch" over
Ophelia and, later, to accompany the prince himself (4.5.74, 5.1.293).
Although Horatio's motive in taking on this role is almost certainly to
protect his friend, he is as prudent as Claudius might wish in his
approach to Ophelia, who he thinks might "strew dangerous conjectures in
ill-breeding minds" (4.5.14-15). If Ophelia's suicide were anywhere near
as long drawn out as the queen's graphic \--although admittedly highly
misleading\-- account of her 'accident' would suggest, the assumption
must be that the watching Horatio allowed her to die (4.7.166-83). It
may be significant that the grave-digger's later argument, that a man
cannot be accused of suicide if he merely lets "the water come to him"
rather than actively entering it, would also imply that a passive
witness of a suicide would be innocent of murder (5.1.9-20). If Horatio
did indeed 'suffer' Ophelia's death, this would of course illustrate his
pragmatic approach to those who are not his friends and his indifference
to commonly accepted codes of piety and nobility \--although in the
light of Ophelia's utter desperation one could see his decision not to
act as entirely compassionate. By serving Claudius Horatio shows that a
thoughtful and passionate man can become involved in politics and even
emulate the ambitious politician's prudence in many situations. His
pragmatism will, however, always be limited by his devotion to his
friends: Horatio supports Hamlet to the bitter end, yet the prince is
potentially far more dangerous to the state than Ophelia.

Laertes's response to his father's death demonstrates the need to
exercise prudence in political life. Shakespeare invites the comparison
to Hamlet in an unusually explicit way, for the prince admits that he
can "by the image of \[his own\] cause...see the portraiture of
\[Laertes's\]," and implies that he envies "the bravery of his grief"
(5.2.77-80). Unlike Hamlet, Laertes is at first naively passionate,
consigning "conscience and grace to the profoundest pit" without pausing
to check the truth of the rumours that Claudius killed his father or
worrying about causing a civil war as he leads a "riotous...rabble"
against the king (4.5.100-39). Luckily Claudius is precisely the right
man to respond peacefully and prudently rather than honourably or
passionately to what amounts to an attempted coup, and his immediate
suggestion that he should be tried before Laertes's "wisest friends"
probably prevents a civil war and saves many lives (4.5.203-13). By the
time it has eventually been proven that Hamlet is the murderer, Laertes
is calm enough to appreciate Claudius's argument that any would-be
avenger would be best advised to proceed with great caution lest his
"arrows...revert....to \[his\] bow again," since the people will always
"convert \[Hamlet's\] gyves to graces," (4.7.16-24).

Although the unphilosophical Laertes's actions demonstrate that he
accepts Claudius's prudent but ignoble reasons for delay, he resists
even more obdurately than Hamlet the thought that he should simply
tolerate "a noble father lost" (4.7.25-29). Laertes avoids the internal
debates which have allowed Hamlet to entertain, if not explicitly
acknowledge, the radical notion that it might be best not to take
revenge at all. We can see the differences between the two men most
clearly in the contrast between Laertes's blind acceptance that honour
must be satisfied even if this were to involve "cut\[ting Hamlet's\]
throat i' th' church" and the prince's decision to spare the praying
Claudius, which, despite his own rhetoric, was essentially prudent and
moderate (4.7.126). Claudius and Laertes together now come to embody the
distorted combination of passion, honour and cunning which a completely
thoughtful revenge would require in this context, as the cunning king
attempts to direct the younger man's passionate and noble spiritedness
in such a way as to ensure that Hamlet will be disposed of without
political disruption (4.7.134-39). In contrast to Hamlet himself,
Laertes refuses to be thwarted by the constraints imposed by the
political situation, but so thoroughly does he contort his honourable
anger in response to these pressures that it is he who introduces the
idea of poison, after Claudius has suggested killing the prince in an
apparently sporting duel with an uncapped rapier (4.7.139-48). After
deciding to "further think," Claudius adds the poisoned chalice to
ensure the success of the plan (4.7.148-62). In a world which is
necessarily dominated by ambition and a prudent concern for political
stability, Laertes's passion and nobility ultimately serve only to make
him Claudius's willing puppet.

Like the ghost and Hamlet himself, Laertes is both passionate and
honourable. Claudius plays on both motives at once when he questions
whether he is merely "the painting of a sorrow, a face without a heart,"
lacking any real constancy, and refers casually to the "envy" evinced by
the prince after hearing a "masterly report" of Laertes's swordsmanship
(4.7.95-123). Just as with Hamlet, Laertes's deepest feelings are not
focused on his father, whom he simply describes as "noble," but in his
case on Ophelia, "whose worth...stood challenger on mount of all the age
for her perfections" (4.5.155-64, 4.7.25-29). Again like Hamlet,
however, his anger and grief have faded by the time he comes to fight
the prince, for he declares himself to be "satisfied in nature," and
admits that he is driven to carry on with the plan only by the
traditional "terms of honor," which offer no precedent for simply
suffering the murder of one's father (5.2.244-52). The sincerity of this
speech is clearly demonstrated when he hesitates to employ the poisoned
sword, confessing to himself that "it is almost against \[his\]
conscience," and as a result, despite being generally acknowledged to be
the better swordsman, eventually falls victim to his own poison
(5.2.296, 5.2.209). As Laertes dies he makes a plea to "exchange
forgiveness" with the prince (5.2.329-31). Thus Laertes's story echoes
Hamlet's in such a way as to bring out two of Shakespeare's main
criticisms of moral constancy: not only does the passionate and noble
man's intransigent spiritedness jar with the political world, but it
also conflicts in the end with his own deeper nature.

Having demonstrated the need for prudent inconstancy in public life,
Shakespeare now shifts his focus for the last time from the political to
the personal sphere. He has hitherto given the two spheres equal weight,
but his deepest concern is to delineate the limits of constancy in
personal relationships. His starting point is that the faith of the
"true-love" must transcend all prudent restraint: the "cockle hat and
staff" which distinguish such a lover in the mad Ophelia's song are the
conventional trappings of a pilgrim, emblematic of his single-minded
fidelity (4.5.23-26). Ophelia's intense grief reminds us, however, that
such limitless devotion has its dark corollary. She mourns for her
violets, traditionally symbolizing fidelity, which "wither'd all when
\[her\] father died," while most of her song concerns the bitterness of
a foolish maid who allowed herself to be "tumbled" by a fickle lover
(4.5.184-85, 4.5.48-66). Although Ophelia herself fails to control her
actions, Shakespeare uses her gifts of herbs to suggest that such
control is possible: thus Laertes is advised to "remember," but with
"thoughts," while Ophelia gives Gertrude some of her rue \--representing
repentance\-- reminding her that it is a "herb of grace a Sundays" and
exhorting both herself and the queen to "wear \[it\] with a difference"
(4.5.175-83). While one cannot simply discard one's inner "rue," the
implication is that one can choose how to act upon it. Unlike Laertes
and Ophelia, Gertrude attempts to turn her misery to positive use and,
as we have seen, protects her son in a careful and prudent manner,
perhaps hoping to atone for her actions and achieve "grace" through the
mutual "blessing" which Hamlet promised her (3.4.171-72).

Ophelia's immoderate bitterness is diametrically contrasted to the
cynical detachment of the first gravedigger. At first the graveyard
scene seems to suggest that philosophical thought exposes the futility
of any attempt to resist the passage of time: the gravedigger's punning
demonstration that men were "gard'ners, ditchers and grave-makers" long
before they "bore arms" hints at the artificiality of both the noble
man's war-like spirit and his hereditary status, and implies that human
life in its natural form consists of nothing more than working for a
living and dying (5.1.29-37). His second joke, which hinges on the fact
that graves can last longer than ships, houses, sets of gallows and, by
implication, even churches, suggests \--in an understandably oblique
way\-- that codes of piety and justice should be seen *sub specie
aeternitatis* as artificial constructs, which simultaneously protect and
remove us from nature, as ships and houses do, but are no more enduring
than the cultures which create them, despite their apparent solidity
(5.1.41-60). The gravedigger's materialistic assumption that death
strips us completely of our identity is evident in his bantering
demonstration of the futility of respectfully digging a grave for
something that used to be Ophelia, but is now merely an object
(5.1.130-36). His familiarity with death seems to have fostered a calm
acceptance of the insignificance of society's most revered institutions
and values, which has led him to wish for nothing more than to carry on
in the ignoble role that he has performed cheerfully for thirty years
(5.1.161-62).

Hamlet himself has increasingly been drawn to a materialistic philosophy
which reduces Polonius and the king to the status of mere "thing\[s\]"
to be "eaten" by worms and beggars (3.3.36-71, 4.2.28-30, 4.3.19-31).
His mocking contemplation of the futility of the politician's ambition,
the courtier's concern with manners and the lawyer's devotion to legal
"quiddities" shows that he has abandoned his initial piety by now and
come to share the gravedigger's radical scepticism (5.1.78-117). He
points out that the lawyers "seek out assurance," like "sheep and
calves" themselves, in "parchment made of sheep-skins...and of
calves'-skins," implying that they can only concern themselves so
earnestly with securing property rights by ignoring the fact that their
own "lands" will ultimately be narrowed to "this box" (5.1.103-117). A
sober contemplation of death undermines the conventional codes of
justice and honor to which the lawyer and courtier \--and indeed the
noble avenger\-- adhere, all of which seem designed to reinforce
society's illusory sense of its own lasting significance.

Through his song, a garbled version of a poem by Thomas Lord Vaux
entitled *The Aged Lover Renounceth Love*, the gravedigger \--Hamlet's
alter ego in this scene\-- displays a resignation to the transience of
even the most constant attachments which is reminiscent of both
Claudius's rueful remark that love carries within its flame "a kind of
week or snuff that will abate it" and the Player King's resigned
acceptance of "passion\[s\] ending" and purposes lost (4.7.110-18,
3.2.194-95). Crucially, however, when Hamlet attempts to mock his
childhood attachment to Yorick, the court jester, now thirty years dead
\--"where be your gibes now, your gambols, your songs, your flashes of
merriment"\-- his stance of detached scepticism is immediately
undermined by the vividly affectionate quality of his memories of riding
on Yorick's back, laughing at his jokes and kissing him countless times
(5.1.184-195). Whereas the mortality of the grandees of society reveals
the futility of their claim to an enduring significance, Yorick's death
in no way detracts from the joy which he gave the young Hamlet.
Moreover, precisely because Yorick was simply concerned to enjoy his
relationship with the young prince, he inspired in Hamlet a lasting
devotion which was far more intrinsically satisfying than the pride of
the courtier, the lawyer or the politician. It is perhaps only in this
humble and limited way that one can truly resist mutability: the lover's
fulfillment is of course fragile, perpetually threatened by the
mortality of his beloved, but the lasting grief which Hamlet feels for
Yorick is itself a sign of the intense loyalty which a joyous friendship
can generate. It is typical of Hamlet that, despite his attempt to
depreciate the significance of the relationship, he models a natural and
moderate response to loss: his calm, yet bittersweet memories of Yorick
position him somewhere between Vaux's cynical "aged lover" and the
desperate Ophelia.

Just after Hamlet's meditations on Yorick Horatio seems to contradict
himself: for the first time in the scene he criticizes his friend for
"consider\[ing\] too curiously" as he contemplates the ultimate
insignificance of Alexander's "noble dust," although earlier in the
scene he agreed with the prince's mockery of the politician "that would
circumvent God" and in fact repeatedly supported the prince's satire on
a variety of forms of pride (5.1.195-06, 5.1.78-81, 5.1.87, 5.1.113-15).
Why should the humble and philosophical Horatio, who seems the last
person to admire Alexander's conquests, suddenly contradict himself in
this way? The most likely answer, I would argue, is that he has been
disturbed by the way in which Hamlet has bracketed his friendship with
Yorick with the futile ambition of politicians and military commanders.
It would be characteristic of the pragmatic Horatio to defend proud
spiritedness along with passionate friendship, despite his awareness of
the futility of Alexander's ambitions, on the grounds that it would be
better for Hamlet to retain his noble delusions than to extend his
sceptical philosophizing so far as to depreciate the value of love
itself. One can deduce from Horatio's changing responses in this scene
that the philosopher should indeed conduct a radical critique of the
social conventions which bolster pride, but should never attempt to
distance himself from his own heart's senseless core. To put the matter
baldly: careful thought reveals that nothing is worth one's constant
devotion except intimate friendship, but also that such friendship is
always worth it.

It is not devotion to Ophelia which leads Hamlet to leap into her grave
during her funeral and grapple with Laertes, for he later admits to
Horatio that the "tow'ring passion" which led him to declare his desire
to "fight until \[his\] eyebrows will no longer wag" in order to prove
that he loved her more than "forty thousand brothers" was merely a
spirited desire to rival "the bravery of \[Laertes's\] grief"
(5.1.255-84, 5.2.76-80). Actually we have seen that Hamlet has moved on
from his relationship with Ophelia to form a much deeper friendship, but
this scene implies that he feels too ashamed of his own inconstancy to
admit this to himself. At this point, for the first and only time in the
play, what we might call Shakespeare's covert satire on noble
spiritedness becomes too obtrusive to be dismissed easily even by a
casual reader or observer, since Hamlet openly admits that his desire to
exceed Laertes's "quantity of love" is childishly competitive (5.2.70).
Moreover, Hamlet's actions are made to contradict his deeper thinking in
a particularly graphic way, since he wrestles Laertes in the very grave
that has just provoked his reflections on the futility of Alexander and
Caesar's pursuit of honor.

Shakespeare presents Hamlet's professed loyalty to Ophelia in this scene
as a pointless display of noble pride and shame, which perpetuates his
mourning after his real passion has cooled. He uses the graveyard scene
as a whole to show that on the one hand we "consider too curiously" if
we attempt to use philosophy to detach ourselves from the lasting grief
which stems from a deep attachment, but on the other that we should
accept the ignoble fact that the intensity of such an attachment cannot
be sustained when it is no longer stimulated by the actual experience of
friendship. Shakespeare not only criticizes the Player King's cynical
resignation to a universal fickleness, but implies that the Player
Queen's urge to commit herself permanently to the memory of her husband,
however natural in its origin, would eventually come to seem nothing
more than a futile gesture, dictated by conventional ideas of virtue. In
the last part of the play Shakespeare uses Ophelia's story to promote
what one might call a healthy inconstancy in mourning, in which
destructively passionate and pointlessly noble responses to loss are
prudently avoided, while the core experience of grief, which is not
itself amenable to reason, is gradually allowed to soften into to a calm
bittersweet affection.

By apologizing for having "forgot\[ten\] himself" in Ophelia's grave,
albeit while simultaneously determining to "court \[Laertes's\] favors,"
Hamlet shows not only that he retains an ability to restrain his noble
spiritedness, but also that he continues to rely on his deepening
friendship with Horatio (5.2.75-78). Nevertheless, the prince
increasingly gives rein to his honourable spiritedness as the play goes
on, freeing himself to act decisively by adopting a new attitude of
pious fatalism, which, like Fortinbras's noble campaign, almost defines
itself by its irrationality. Thus he praises "rashness" and
"indiscretion" and declares that there is "a divinity that shapes our
ends," superior to "deep plots," even though his real view is implicit
not only in the thorough going materialism of his reflections in the
graveyard, but in his dying comment that "the rest is silence"
(5.2.6-11, 5.2.358). This new stance allows him to send Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern to their deaths in what Horatio will later call "casual
slaughters" and to dismiss them as "baser nature\[s\]" who "did make
love to this employment" and so are justly caught in a clash of "mighty
opposites" (5.2.57-62, 5.2.382). He claims that the deaths of his old
school friends are not "near \[his\] conscience," but still feels guilty
enough to defend his actions from Horatio's implicit reproach
(5.2.56-58). His only response to Horatio's worries regarding Claudius's
intentions is to declare that "a man's life is no more than to say
'one'," while he rationalizes his decision to fight a duel with Laertes
with the uncharacteristically glib thought that "there is a special
providence in the fall of a sparrow," adding that "since no man, of
aught he leaves, knows what is't to leave betimes, let be" (5.2.74,
5.2.219-24). Just as Horatio might have feared, this last remark
suggests that Hamlet's overly "curious" meditations on the ephemerality
of all things have led him to a desperate nihilism of the type that
might be familiar to a modern audience: since all deeds are equally
insignificant and life no better than death, he reasons that he might as
well act nobly and disdain the sort of misgivings regarding the proposed
duel that "would perhaps trouble a woman" (5.2.215-16).

Horatio more or less warns Hamlet to suspect foul play when he is
challenged to the duel, but the prince has "a kind of fighting in
\[his\] heart," where all is "ill," which leads him to court the
"felicity" of death (5.2.4-5, 5.2.212-18, 5.2.347-48). This "fighting"
is a reminder that there is still a part of Hamlet which is opposed to
direct action against Claudius, despite his noble talk. The prince might
well see death at the hands of Laertes as an honourable means of
avoiding such action, as well as an effective way of escaping personal
misery. Thus Hamlet finally chooses the option of noble, but futile
self-destruction which he contemplated in the "to be" soliloquy.
Nevertheless, the fact that he does at last act decisively against
Claudius, but only in response to Gertrude's poisoning, demonstrates
that his passion is in the end stronger than his nobility (5.2.309-27).
At the same time his delays have ensured that Gertrude never has to
grieve for a murdered king and, perhaps more by luck than judgement,
that Claudius's guilt becomes clear enough to the assembled lords to
justify his violent death and so to remove the risk of civil war. In
this way amidst the devastation of the ending Shakespeare unobtrusively
endorses Hamlet's extended procrastination, showing it to be more
prudent and compassionate than the noble alternative.

Horatio's self-restraint is shown in the way in which he agrees
emphatically with Hamlet's remarks about a controlling "divinity,"
perhaps because he considers noble piety preferable to nihilistic
philosophy (5.2.6-11). Later, however, as he begins to realize that
Hamlet is in real danger, he ignores the profession of belief in a
"special providence" by which the prince rationalizes his acceptance of
Laertes's challenge and the spirited account which he gives of his own
swordsmanship, where he has "been in continual practice," urging his
friend instead to use his "mind" before accepting the challenge, and
undercutting his noble pride with the terse assurance that he "will
lose" (5.2.209-18). When Hamlet at last actually asks his friend whether
he would not now be "damned" if he did not take revenge \--albeit
framing the question as a matter of "conscience" in such a fervently
pious manner as to make it appear rhetorical\-- Horatio simply makes the
pragmatic point that "it must be shortly known to \[Claudius\]" that he
has escaped from the ship (5.2.63-72). Here again Horatio ignores what
we might call the moral issues and is simply concerned to anticipate the
next move of a murderous king. Rather than prudently "suffering" the
self-destruction of his disruptive friend, he focuses his thoughts
entirely on protecting Hamlet, initially by supporting his pious
fatalism, but then, when there is real danger, with a pragmatic realism
which implicitly undermines his noble illusions.

Horatio's response to Hamlet's death illustrates his characteristic
mixture of "blood and judgment." Typically, he presents his attempt at
suicide as honourable in the "antique Roman" style, but his extreme
distress is evident in his repeated efforts to resist Hamlet's efforts
to wrest the poisoned cup from his grasp (5.2.340-43). Horatio is not in
the end the stoical rationalist that he might appear to be: his
attempted suicide underscores his passionate affection for his friend.
Nevertheless, even though Horatio obeys Hamlet for one last time and
agrees to live on to "tell \[his\] story," it is already clear from his
blunt summary of "accidental judgments" and "casual slaughters" that his
aim will not be to clear the prince's "wounded name," as the latter
requested (5.2.382, 5.2.344-49). Horatio decides that an honest account
of recent events must be:

Presently perform'd

Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance

On plots and errors happen. (5.2.393-95)

For precisely the same reasons one might have expected Horatio to tell
Fortinbras immediately that Hamlet has nominated him to be the next king
of Denmark, but, surprisingly, he chooses not do so (5.2.356-58). He
mentions the nomination only when the hot-headed Fortinbras has already
started to press his claims to the throne, and then so vaguely \--"of
that I shall have also cause to speak"\-- as to suggest that his motive
in so doing might be to forestall rather than install the spirited young
prince (5.2.391). Horatio's careful prudence is also evident in his
response to Hamlet's last words, "the rest is silence," which he seems
to realize could be understood \--probably correctly\-- by the assembled
court on this very public occasion to mean "all that remains is
non-existence" (5.2.358). The pragmatic Horatio, who, it should be
remembered, reveals his materialistic philosophy only to his intimate
friends, reassures the listening crowd that "flights of angels" will
"sing" the prince to a "rest" which through a clever pun he now manages
to identify with the peace of heaven rather than the silent void
(1.5.166-67, 5.2.359-60). Because Horatio does not feel duty bound to
honor Hamlet's memory, he is free to "wear \[his\] rue with a
difference," promoting social stability in his characteristically
manipulative manner, while he waits for his sadness to fade gradually,
as it must do in the course of nature.

Thus Horatio's "blood and judgment" combine in such a manner as to
render him utterly devoted to Hamlet while he is alive, but completely
pragmatic in his approach to the prince's final wishes, which he
realizes are noble rather than prudent. The contrast between this
approach and Hamlet's own noble commitment to honor his dead father's
request hints at Shakespeare's critique of conventional ideas of
virtuous loyalty. Throughout the play Horatio has obeyed all of Hamlet's
requests except where he judged that the prince's life was in danger,
but, unlike Hamlet himself and the Player Queen, he seems to realize
that his loyalty has always been motivated by the actual experience of
love, which means that the prince's death frees him from all the
obligations associated with friendship. Nevertheless, although Horatio
seems now to be coolly focused on preserving political stability, it
should not be forgotten that he would have committed suicide and left
Denmark to its fate had not Hamlet begged him to remain alive to tell
his story. Thus the play ends as it began; by showing us Horatio
prioritizing his own passionate attachments, but dealing prudently and
compassionately with a fickle and mutable world, even though this is
never his primary consideration. In contrast, Hamlet's dying speeches
are perhaps his most foolish, since he concentrates on saving his
reputation rather than on cementing his friendship with Horatio.

To sum up on the argument of the whole play: although the passionate man
will be shocked and disturbed by the fickleness which he is bound to
encounter both in politics and in his personal life, his sympathetic
nature will eventually temper any urge he might feel to "take arms"
against this pervasive inconstancy. Nevertheless, insofar as he is noble
as well as passionate, he will be prone to value moral constancy over
his natural inclinations, and may therefore be driven by his rigorous
principles to attempt to punish or reform a fickle world. On a personal
level this attempt is likely to be both cruel and futile, since most of
those whom he loves are bound to be less deeply passionate than himself
and therefore innately prone to inconstancy. On a political level his
idealism may well be highly disruptive, since the state is often most
efficiently managed by those whose detached, self-protective prudence
enables them to prioritize political stability over both passionate
attachments and moral principles. The play centres, in both a literal
and metaphorical sense, on Hamlet's speech in praise of Horatio, who
reserves his devoted constancy for his friends, but has rooted out any
noble or moral impulse to apply similar standards to a pervasively
fickle society, although he does support political stability wherever
possible in a coolly compassionate manner.[^12]

A thoughtful man will draw a distinction between noble or pious
aspirations to a more lasting significance, which are shown in the
graveyard scene to be illusions rooted in social convention rather than
nature, and constant friendship, which offers substantial and enduring
rewards, albeit on a humbler scale. Thus the only actions in the play
which are truly effective are those by which Horatio demonstrates his
unlimited and imprudent loyalty to Hamlet and so gains the prince's
complete trust. Friends are mortal, however, and grief is no more
amenable to rational restraint than love, but at least the thoughtful
man contains his grief and allows it to run its natural course. He
recognizes that bereavement frees him from any obligation to remain
loyal to his beloved, since true constancy is not dictated by a moral
code, but arises naturally from the fulfilling experience of friendship.
Thus, returning to the three key elements around which the play
revolves, Horatio's loyalty remains entirely passionate, since his
thoughtful nature allows him to root out any trace of noble constancy.

Shakespeare's attempt to separate noble from natural constancy might
seem irrelevant to the modern age, which generally attempts to base
morality on sincere feeling rather than honor, but I would argue that
"the struggle for recognition," to use Fukuyama's phrase, remains a key
motive for virtue.[^13] In fact one could argue that, paradoxically,
moral action appeals particularly to the noble pride of the modern man
precisely because it now presents itself as selflessly compassionate or
indignant. Thus in our times the thoughtful and passionate are even less
well placed than their Elizabethan counterparts to understand the
intricate and ambiguous ways in which pride and shame can interact with
natural passion to reinforce idealism. As I have argued elsewhere,
Shakespeare's core value is constancy in love, and what one might call
the natural nobility of the lover as he strives to achieve fulfilment
through perfect unity with his beloved.[^14] In *Hamlet* he reminds us
of his *summum bonum*, but, in order to prevent passionate readers from
being distracted from the deepest demands of their own hearts, focuses
mainly on a critique of noble constancy which is so radical that it is
likely to startle audiences in any era, if it is fully understood.

[^1]: For friendship as Shakespeare's *summum bonum* see Richard Burrow,
    "Fulfilment in 'As You Like It,'" *Interpretation: a Journal of
    Political Philosophy* 41/2, Fall (2014), 91-122. This should be seen
    as a companion piece to the current essay.

[^2]: All references to *Hamlet* are taken from *The Riverside
    Shakespeare*, ed. G.Blakemore Evans et al. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
    Company, 1997).

[^3]: See A.C.Bradley, "Shakespeare's Tragic Period-'Hamlet,'" in
    *Twentieth Century Interpretations of "Hamlet,"* ed. David Bevington
    (New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc., 1968), 19-21; E.M.W.Tillyard,
    *Shakespeare's Problem Plays* (London: Chatto and Windus), 19-21.

[^4]: Marilyn French, "Chaste Constancy in 'Hamlet*,*'*"* in *"Hamlet":
    Contemporary Critical Essays,* ed. Martin Coyle (London: Macmillan,
    1992), 97-99, 106-07.

[^5]: Dover Wilson, *What Happens in "Hamlet"* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2007), 293-94.

[^6]: For a sympathetic account of the arguments against "taking arms"
    see Helen Gardner, "The Historical Approach to 'Hamlet,'" in
    *Shakespeare: "Hamlet"; A Casebook* (London: Macmillan, 1968),
    145-48.

[^7]: For a useful summary of the critics who view Hamlet as cruel and
    destructive, as well as those who oppose this view see Philip
    Edwards, "Tragic balance in 'Hamlet,'" in *"Hamlet": Contemporary
    Critical Essays*, ed. Martin Coyle (London, Macmillan, 1992), 19-21,
    27.

[^8]: *The Riverside Shakespeare*, 1213n284.

[^9]: Leonard Tennenhouse, "Power in 'Hamlet,'" in "*Hamlet":
    Contemporary Critical Essays*, ed. Martin Coyle (London: Macmillan,
    1992), 164.

[^10]: David Leverenz, "The Woman in Hamlet," in *"Hamlet": Contemporary
    Critical Essays* ed. Martin Coyle (London: Macmillan, 1992), 133.

[^11]: D.G.James, "The New Doubt," in *Twentieth Century Interpretations
    of "Hamlet,"* ed. David Bevington (New Jersey: Prentice Hall inc.,
    1968), 46.

[^12]: Whatever is at the centre of an esoteric work is "the least
    exposed": Leo Strauss, *Persecution and the Art of Writing*
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 13.

[^13]: Francis Fukuyama, *The End of History and the Last Man* (London:
    Penguin Books, 2012), 161.

[^14]: Richard Burrow, "Fulfilment in 'As You Like It.'"
