---
title: '*Twelfth Night* and the Justice of Love'
# ---

# ---
author: Richard Burrow
created: '2020-03-14'
date: '2023-07-22'
footer: footer1
layout: layouts/post.njk
plain-title: Justice in Twelfth Night
---

By setting the play at the end of the festive season Shakespeare reminds
us that all "pleasure will be paid, one time or another" (2.4.70-71).
The financial transactions which play such an unusually pervasive role
in *Twelfth Night* direct the reader's attention towards the central
question which the play raises; namely, how can one earn what is truly
of value (1.2.18, 1.2.52-57, 1.3.22-24, 1.4.38-40, 2.3.31-34,
2.3.182-89, 2.4.67-71, 3.1.43-53, 3.3.38-48, 3.4.2-3, 3.4.340-52,
4.1.19-21, 4.2.118, 5.1.27-49).[^1] Clearly, any exploration of this
issue must be based on an understanding of what is required for the
fulfilment of our deepest needs. It is no coincidence that the play's
subtitle, *What You Will*, is almost synonymous with that of *As You
Like It*, which, I have argued elsewhere, is entirely focused on the
*summum bonum*.[^2] In *Twelfth Night*, as in *As You Like It*,
Shakespeare presents deep attachments as an irreducible ultimate good,
and argues that they are naturally just, since they offer the reward of
lasting intimacy in return for a high level of self-denying, diligent
care. The play also evaluates the nature and extent of the effort
involved in pursuing prestige and sensual pleasure in relation to the
returns which they yield: sensualists attempt to reduce their cares to a
minimum, but gain only fleeting and insubstantial pleasures, whereas
pride, whether manifesting itself as honour, piety or philosophical
detachment, offers entirely illusory rewards, despite frequently
demanding a considerable outlay of courage or self-restraint.

Because the friendship between Sebastian and Antonio develops into the
nearest thing to a fully reciprocal attachment in the play, it provides
a benchmark by which all the other relationships can be measured.
Weighed down both by grief for his twin sister, Viola, whom he presumes
drowned in the wreck from which Antonio rescued him, and by an awareness
of the extraordinary "trouble" which he has caused the captain,
Sebastian declares that the guilt would "kill him" if he allowed his
saviour to share any further in the "malignancy of \[his\] fate," since
this would be "a bad recompense" for his painstaking care (2.1.1-42).
Accordingly, although Sebastian eventually feels "charge\[d\]...in
manners" to recount his history and parentage by the very "modesty"
which makes Antonio refrain from trying to "extort" these details from
him, he still attempts to conceal his destination from his friend for
fear that he should insist on following him. However, when Antonio
finally abandons his carefully maintained restraint to protest that his
beloved's decision to cut all ties with him is tantamount to
"murther\[ing\] me for my love," Sebastian feels duty bound to tell him
that he is going to Illyria (2.1.12-43). Paradoxically, therefore,
Antonio's apparently self-denying generosity, although from one point of
view absolutely noble, turns out to be a prudent investment, since it
enables him to set in train the cycle of obligation and requital which
Shakespeare presents as the foundation of intimate relationships.

Antonio does indeed follow Sebastian to Illyria, but eventually manages
to soothe his friend's sensitive conscience by insisting that he has
been led by an entirely "willing love" to guide him through this "rough
and unhospitable land" (3.3.8-13). Just as in the previous scene Antonio
was finally driven to reveal the depth of his need for his friend out of
pure desperation, when Sebastian seemed to be about to "murther" him by
cutting all ties, here he admits to a "desire (more sharp than filed
steel) ...to see" his friend only in order to reassure him that he
"make\[s a\] pleasure of \[his\] pains" (3.3.1-5). If Sebastian had
responded less sensitively to Antonio's advances, the captain would
undoubtedly have continued to efface his own needs, while foregrounding
the display of humble devotion through which he hopes to gain his
beloved's trust and gratitude. The intricate transactions through which
Antonio gains Sebastian's friendship are thus crucial to the thought of
the play, since they are designed to expose what the other passionate
lovers in the play quite naturally conceal; namely, that they expect in
the end to gain a proportionate return for their outlay of humble
devotion.

One might assume that the captain's open-hearted generosity would be
easy to exploit, but, unlike his namesakes in [The Merchant of
Venice]{.underline} and [Antony and Cleopatra,]{.underline} he has
always retained a keen sense of what is due to him: we learn, for
instance, that he "stood out" robustly against the purely expedient
decision of his former comrades in arms to hand back the spoils of what
he still sees as a just war with Orsino (3.3.30-37, 5.1.74-76). He
pursues his friendship with Sebastian with such diligence because he
expects ultimately to gain a rich reward for his efforts, for he sees in
his beloved a "promise \[of\] most venerable worth" (3.4.362-63). Thus,
the anger which Antonio feels when Sebastian apparently refuses to
return his purse is proportionate to the effort which he now thinks he
has wasted:

Is't possible that my deserts to you

Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery

Lest that it make me so unsound a man

As to upbraid you with those kindnesses

That I have done for you.

(3.4.348-52)

Antonio's willingness to abandon his display of self-denial when he has
lost all hope of being rewarded for his efforts provides the clearest
evidence in the play that lovers' sacrifices are essentially a means of
securing their beloveds' affections. Again, however, his efforts to
restrain his "unsound" impulse to call in Sebastian's debt underscore
the point that lovers normally repress or sublimate what we might call
the strategic aspect of their erotic transactions, lest too direct an
expression of their own needs should undermine the harmonious rapport
with their beloved which they have worked so hard to establish.

This view of love as a transaction is not as reductive as it might
appear. Antonio's strategies may not be straightforwardly noble in the
way that they seem, but his desperate assertion that it would "murther"
him to lose Sebastian and his willingness to follow his friend to a
country where he has many mortal enemies--and where in fact he may well
in the end be executed (5.1.69-100)--demonstrate that his attachment is
strong enough to override even the most instinctive desires and fears
(3.3.25-37). Antonio does indeed "make \[a\] pleasure" of his "pains" in
a sense, because he relishes the fact that in supporting Sebastian, he
is continually reinforcing his beloved's trust and gratitude and in so
doing, progressively deepening the relationship.

Antonio's strategic combination of apparently self-denying care and
direct emotional demands ultimately gains the desired effect. Since
Sebastian makes his apparently spontaneous proposal that they should go
sight-seeing together immediately after apologising for his inability to
reward Antonio financially and acknowledging that his repeatedly
expressed gratitude is "uncurrent pay," we may conclude that it is
indeed inspired by a new understanding that he can requite his friend's
generosity simply through his affectionate companionship (3.3.13-19).
After tacitly accepting the erotic contract that he has been offered,
Sebastian completely abandons his earlier reticence and at last gives
free rein to his underlying desire to rely on his friend, even to the
extent of accepting his purse without protest (3.3.38-48).

Almost as soon as Sebastian allows himself to express his need for
intimate companionship, he finds that he can hardly bear to be without
his friend:

Antonio, O my dear Antonio!

How the hours have rack'd and tortured me,

Since I have lost thee.

(5.1.218-20; see also 4.3.8)

This intense exclamation of relief indicates that, once lovers have been
drawn into an intimate attachment, they will inevitably experience a
compulsive urge to protect the beloved upon whom their happiness now
depends. The concern which Sebastian feels for Antonio's welfare now
precisely reciprocates the "fear" that the latter expressed for
Sebastian's own safety in Illyria (3.3.11-13; see also 3.3.35-37).
Similarly, as we shall see, Maria strives to protect Sir Toby from being
banished by Olivia and the terrified Olivia intervenes in order to
prevent Sebastian from fighting a duel (2.3.72-74, 2.3.131-33,
4.1.45-59). The corollary of this point is of course that when
passionate characters like Viola, Sebastian and Olivia actually do
experience a major loss, they feel it with an intensity which is almost
commensurate with the depth of the original attachment.

Sebastian's scrupulous sense of justice makes him particularly difficult
to court, but it is precisely this quality which gives him the potential
to be an unusually loyal and affectionate friend, since his desire not
to build up unmanageable emotional debt springs from his sensitive
awareness that deep intimacies entail ceaseless, reciprocal care. From
this point onwards the friendship between Antonio and Sebastian will
cause both men to make a "pleasure of \[their\] pains," since they know
that each expression of concern not only helps to protect and nurture
the beloved upon whom their happiness depends, but deepens an attachment
which they have enshrined as their ultimate good. The story of this
relationship therefore perfectly illustrates the paradoxical justice of
what one might call the erotic contract: in return for his apparently
free, painfully pleasurable gifts of generosity, loyalty and restraint,
Antonio eventually secures the only recompense he ever desired; namely,
a deep intimacy with Sebastian, in which both men gain a trusted,
constant companion in return for their sympathetic care. Thus,
Shakespeare shows that there is a close link between justice and
eroticism, since relationships are fulfilling to the extent that lovers
are capable of creating and requiting obligation.

Like Antonio, but unlike Olivia (see below), Viola balances her care for
others with a healthy attention to her own needs. She realises from the
start that she is grieving for her own loss rather than for Sebastian
himself, whom she at first presumes to have been drowned when their ship
was wrecked:

And what should I do in Illyria?

My brother he is in Elysium.

(1.2.3-4)

It is significant both that she has an identical twin and that she
subsequently changes her plan to present herself to Orsino as a eunuch:
Viola is an intransigently erotic character, who must always be
searching for a twin soul. (The description of the twins as "an apple,
cleft in two" might well remind us of Aristophanes' account of love in
Plato's [Symposium]{.underline}, 5.1.222-24.[^3]) Viola promises the
captain that she will prove herself "worth \[Orsino's\] service," since
she can "sing and speak to him in many sorts of music," but this
slightly odd phrase must be a figure of speech, for she never sings for
the count, despite having ample opportunity to do so (1.2.57-58). Since
music is regularly linked with passion throughout the play and Viola
herself is named after a musical instrument, her alleged virtuosity
could serve as a metaphor for her innate ability to create harmonious
relationships.

Viola understands that attachments, in however nascent a form, can oil
the wheels of even the most mundane transactions, but also that they
come at a price. Having picked out one of her rescuers who shows 'fair
behaviour," she extends herself to reward him freely for disguising her
as a man and even promises him further remuneration if she should
succeed in making herself useful to Orsino (1.2.52-57). In return for
her generosity she gains a loyal and discreet servant, who is motivated
by an ongoing cycle of gratitude and requital: "when my tongue blabs,
then let my eyes not see" (1.2.63). Her dealings with the captain, which
take place in the immediate aftermath of the shipwreck, are evidently
much more prosaic and superficial than those which take place between
Antonio and Sebastian, who have had "three months" of unbroken
companionship in which to develop their relationship, but for this very
reason they illustrate with particular clarity the essential process by
which attachments are formed (5.1.94-96): Viola achieves her aims
because she chooses an open-hearted man to help her, and secures his
affection for the future by showing him the enduring benefits of their
relationship.

Viola uses a glorified version of this strategy to endear herself to
Orsino once she has fallen in love with him, since she does all she can
to show him the advantages of her devoted affection, even to the extent
of courting Olivia on his behalf with great dedication and
self-restraint (1.5.139-54). The impediments of Orsino's prior
attachment to Olivia and his notorious inconstancy, not to mention her
own relatively humble status and assumed gender, matter less to Viola at
this point in the relationship than one might have thought, since even
under normal circumstances trust and gratitude can only be accumulated
through careful, restrained diligence (2.4.73-78). As she herself
suggests, her fidelity is as absolute as that of the lover in Feste's
song, who is prepared to die of grief rather than abandon his devotion
to his inconstant beloved (2.4.21-22, 2.4.51-66). The significance of
this "old and plain" song is underlined both by Orsino and Viola: it is
"silly sooth, and dallies with the innocence of love, like the old age,"
evoking self-denying constancy with such poignancy as to "give...a very
echo to the seat where love is thron'd" (2.4.42-48, 2.4.21-22). Viola
recapitulates the theme of the song in her account of her imagined
sister, whom she famously represents as "Patience on a monument, smiling
at grief" (2.4.110-18).

Ironically, however, Viola's evocation of stoical resignation itself has
a strategic purpose, since it is designed to attract the duke's interest
in as proactive a manner as her unusual situation allows. Similarly,
when she advises Orsino that he might have to resign himself to Olivia's
indifference, she is certainly concerned for Orsino's well-being, and
implicitly for her own, since she is in the same situation, but it is
clearly also in her interests that the duke should follow her advice
(2.4.87-92). These ambiguities point to Shakespeare's paradoxical
implication that it is precisely Viola's seemingly self-denying fidelity
which ultimately enables her to fulfil her deepest desires. It is not to
demean her efforts to point to their strategic purpose, for the strategy
can only succeed if it is maintained with an intransigent consistency
which is from one point of view absolutely noble. She is so intent on
making herself indispensable to Orsino and earning his gratitude that
she throws all her considerable resources into her vicarious courtship
of Olivia, regardless of the fact that it seems unlikely at this point
in the relationship that he would ever be in a position to appreciate
the full extent of her sacrifice.

Orsino is as intrigued by Viola's constant devotion as he is by that of
Olivia and the lover in Feste's song: when her true gender is eventually
revealed, he quickly remembers that she has told him "a thousand times
\[she\] never should...love woman like to me" (5.1.267-68). After
initially offering simply to pay her for her services, even the
self-involved duke eventually feels impelled to reward Viola with his
intimate attention, asking her a series of searching and sympathetic
questions (1.4.38-40, 2.4.20-29, 2.4.104-19). Eventually, Viola's
efforts are rewarded, in however partial and paradoxical a manner: when
the duke vows to "sacrifice the lamb that \[he\] love\[s\]" and
"tender\[s\] dearly" in order to spite her rival, Viola submits
"willingly" and in a "jocund" spirit, since, even as he is threatening
to kill her, he finally acknowledges the depth of an attachment which
quite literally matters to her "more than...life" (5.1.125-35). Like
Antonio, she is prepared to override her instinct of self-preservation
in order to prove her humble devotion, in the hope that her beloved will
eventually respond in kind.

Viola's love for a character who is prone to such outbursts of
childishly tyrannical rage--characteristic, we may infer, of the
habitual sensualist--might seem undiscriminating, but the paradoxical
tenderness which Orsino also displays at this point is, as we shall see,
only the latest in a series of indications that he is beginning to
outgrow his fickle hedonism. The justice of love is, it seems, only
tangentially related to conventional moral standards, for the only
judgement that matters to Viola regarding Orsino's character is whether
he is willing and able to return her affection. The eventual success of
her courtship underscores Shakespeare's paradoxical implication that, in
matters of love, utter humility and unstinting, apparently disinterested
devotion often constitute the shrewdest investments. Evidently, however,
there are risks involved: until Olivia asserts her marital rights,
Orsino seems as determined to execute Viola as he is Antonio
(5.1.141-69). A more common danger is of course that passionate lovers
might simply be ignored or rejected, like Viola's imagined sister or the
lover in Feste's song.

The parallels between the strategies adopted by Antonio and Viola
suggest that a risky initial investment of apparently self-denying
benevolence is usually required to set in train the cycle of gratitude
and reciprocal generosity by which attachments are established and
sustained. Despite her unusual situation, Viola's courtship of the
self-involved Orsino is in a sense more straightforward and conventional
than Antonio's, since she can concentrate purely on stimulating the
duke's gratitude and trust through her devoted, apparently selfless
service -although, precisely because the duke lacks Sebastian's
sensitive conscience, it is unlikely that her affection will ever be
fully requited. In contrast, the captain is compelled, first by
Sebastian's conscience and subsequently by his apparent ingratitude, to
abandon his initial "modesty" and make his own emotional demands more
frankly than he might have wished. The complicated transactions between
Antonio and Sebastian are designed to expose with more clarity than
Viola's "modesty" allows her to do the integral role that justice plays
in determining the depth of an attachment: relationships are fulfilling
to the extent that both parties are equally determined to make a
strategic investment of apparently self-denying devotion, from which,
however, they each ultimately hope to realise a profit that is
proportional to their efforts.

With the exception of Maria, the other characters are distracted from
their deeper needs either by pride or sensuality, although several of
them change their priorities as the play goes on. Because Orsino's
"appetite" is primarily for the countess's body, "that miracle and queen
of gems that nature pranks her in," it is bound to "sicken and so die"
immediately after "surfeiting" (1.1.2-4, 2.4.85-86). As the duke
contemplates the way in which the "strain" of desire inevitably ends in
"a dying fall," his sadness gives way for a moment to a fully-fledged
nihilism:

O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou,

That notwithstanding thy capacity

Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,

Of what validity and pitch so'er,

But falls into abatement and low price

Even in a minute.

(1.1.9-14)

Orsino's melancholy stems from his recognition that the sensual life to
which he is addicted cannot satisfy his innate yearning for constancy.
The implication is that he turns to "love-thoughts" at the end of the
first scene in order to avoid the "dying fall" which must inevitably
follow an orgasm (1.1.39-40).

Orsino hopes to escape these frustrations by battening on Olivia's
intransigent constancy:

O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame

To pay this debt of love but to a brother,

How will she love when the rich golden shaft

Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else

That live in her; when liver, brain, and heart,

Those sovereign thrones, are all supplied and fill'd

Her sweet perfections with one self king!

(1.1.32-38)

The duke clearly admires the way in which truly passionate lovers
sacrifice "all affections else" that might impede their attempts to
establish a deep rapport with their beloved, but at the same time he
himself has no motive to take such pains--as is implied by the fact that
he seems to court Olivia entirely through go-betweens--since his primary
goal remains physical pleasure.[^4] Thus, even as he praises Olivia's
constancy, he prioritises her "liver"--that is, her sexual appetite--
over her "brain, and heart" in the list of the "perfections" which he
hopes to "fill" (no doubt literally as well as metaphorically). Orsino
shows the self-absorption of the habitual sensualist when, instead of
describing himself as hunting Olivia's heart, as one might expect, he
declares that it is his own heart which is constantly being harried by
"fell and cruel" desires (1.1.17-22). Having no reason to practise
self-denial himself, he offers the countess no reason to feel that she
owes him a "debt of love" in return. Olivia's rejection of Orsino's
advances implies that she is absolutely aware of his shortcomings, which
must seem particularly egregious when contrasted with the loyal
affection of the brother whom she is mourning. Thus, Orsino's courtship
is precisely contrasted with those of Antonio and Viola, both in its
strategies and in its outcome.

Nevertheless, Orsino's frustration with the transience of sensual desire
and appreciation of Olivia's fidelity suggest that he may be on the cusp
of prioritising loyal attachments over physical stimulation. Not only
does he praise the "silly sooth" of Feste's song about a lover so
constant that he resigns himself to dying of grief, but he indirectly
criticises his own dedication to sensual pleasure when he tells Viola
that a woman should marry an older man in order to "sway...level in her
husband's heart," since a young man's "fancies" are likely to be more
"giddy and infirm" than her own (2.4.42-46, 2.4.29-35).
Characteristically, however, he then contradicts this latter point by
declaring that such an inequality of age is also necessary because
"women are as roses, whose fair flow'r...doth fall that very hour;" an
argument which assumes that even the passion of older men is primarily
sexual and therefore inevitably fleeting (2.4.36-39). He also
contradicts his admiration for the stoicism of the lover in the song
when he insists that his love for Olivia "can give no place, bide no
denay" (2.4.124). It is Orsino's focus on physical passion which
confuses him: his boast that male sexual desire is "as hungry as the
sea" and therefore more constant than female passion not only
contradicts his initial point, but his recognition in the first scene
that even a sensual passion which "receiveth as the sea" inevitably
"falls into abatement and low price" as soon as it has been consummated
(2.4.93-103, 1.1.9-14).

Aided rather than impeded by her masculine disguise, however, Viola has
clearly managed to induce her beloved to form an attachment which for
once has more to do with gratitude and trusting reliance than physical
attraction. By interrogating Viola so searchingly, and in a manner so
unlike his long range, generic, but at the same time bullish, courtship
of Olivia, Orsino shows that he has finally been distracted from his
self-absorption: it is significant that his most intimate conversation
with Viola is eventually ended by her own embarrassed reticence, rather
than any lack of interest on the duke's side (2.4.104-22).[^5] This
extended expression of sympathetic concern is a sign of a new
understanding on Orsino's part that it might pay to apply himself to his
friendships -which is not to suggest that he would ever be able to match
Viola's dedication. Later, his sudden decision to abandon his spiteful
revenge and marry Viola demonstrates that he has already formed a deeper
attachment to "the lamb that I do love" than his habitual absorption in
his own physical desires has allowed him to recognise (5.1.266,
5.1.385-88, 5.1.130). The couple's married relationship will of course
be sexual, but it will be sustained in the long run by Viola's humble
devotion, which the duke admits to having found intriguing long before
he knew that she was female (5.1.267-68). Orsino's changing priorities
are illustrated by the fact that it is Viola's passionate avowal of
undying loyalty which triggers his desire to see her in her "woman's
weeds" (5.1.269-73).

Orsino's significantly named servants are used to highlight the contrast
between the Duke's fickle hedonism and the austere constancy of Olivia's
mourning: while Curio's invitation to "go hunt...the hart" might remind
his master that a truly determined courtship would demand a far more
careful approach, Valentine implicitly criticises the countess precisely
for prioritising her cares over her pleasures (1.1.16, 1.1.25-31).
Olivia's "cloistress"-like withdrawal from the world and determination
to "once a day...with eye-offending brine...season a brother's dead
love" suggest that she takes a perverse pride in the constancy of her
mourning, which by now has come to overshadow her natural sadness
(1.1.27-31). It takes Feste's wit to induce Olivia to understand that
her real emotion is not as nobly self-denying as it seems, since she is
mourning for the "dead love" which she used to share with her brother
rather than for the man himself, who she is sure is in heaven
(1.5.62-74). Feste's implication is that it must be an affectation on
Olivia's part, rather than a sign of pure constancy as she imagines, to
allow her own needs to be side-lined for seven years by cares which are
themselves ultimately derived from those needs (1.1.25-26). Thus,
Olivia's display of pious ascetism is shown to be as far removed as
Orsino's narcissistic sensuality from the balanced, equitable love
represented by Antonio and Viola, who invest a huge amount of
self-denying care in their beloveds, but whose ultimate purpose is, as
we have seen, to fulfil their own deepest needs. Just as Antonio's
self-denial has its natural limits, we can see that after three months
Sebastian's intense grief for a lost sibling is, in contrast with
Olivia's, beginning to give way to the restless energy which eventually
brings him to Illyria (2.1.39-43).

Although Olivia's mourning is indeed, as Orsino realises, a sign of her
capacity to love deeply and constantly, her passions are evidently
tangled up with her pride, just as her name itself is a tangled version
of 'Viola' and 'Malvolio'.[^6] However, with these passions now
partially liberated by Feste's serious joke, the countess is not too
haughty to be entranced by Viola's fervent declaration that she would
"make a willow cabin at \[her\] gate" and sing "loyal cantons of
contemned love," if she herself loved with "such a suff'ring, such a
deadly life" as her master does (1.5.264-76). It is above all this
vision of patient, determined fidelity--inspired no doubt by Viola's own
deep feelings for Orsino--which attracts the countess, since it seems to
offer her the promise of a loyal intimacy to rival or even surpass her
"brother's dead love." At this point Olivia certainly abandons her
contempt for physical beauty, which is, as Viola implies, nothing more
than a "proud" affectation, and begins to fish for compliments
(1.5.231-51). She is, however, still more attracted to Viola's "tongue"
and "spirit," which she places first and last respectively in her list
of desirable qualities, than her "limbs," which are of course unimposing
by the standards of masculine beauty (1.5.292, 1.5.156-62). Viola
endears herself to Olivia for the same reasons as Orsino admires the
countess herself: all three characters appreciate that loyalty and
self-denial are the measures of true devotion, although Viola is the
only one who consistently prioritises love over pride and sensual
desire.

Olivia's pride manifests itself in her piety, her concern for social
status and her maidenly sense of honour. Her pious ascetism is abandoned
as abruptly as her "cloistress"-like veil - which is, ironically,
briefly redeployed to facilitate her flirtation with Viola before
finally being discarded for good (1.5.164-235). Her initial impulse
after realising that she is attracted to "the man" rather than "the
master" is to reassure herself that Viola's "state" and "parentage" must
be noble (1.5.289-94). She attempts for a while to resist her feelings,
reasoning that her "eye \[is\] too great a flatterer for my mind," but
she is, as we have seen, in the grip of a stronger force than Viola's
assumed masculine appearance could ever exert unaided, while her
objections are weaker than she realises, since they actually stem from
pride rather than reason, as she imagines (1.5.308-9). After being
rejected for the first time, she again strives desperately to restrain
herself, attempting to distance herself from her feelings by dwelling on
her superior rank: "how apt the poor are to be proud...how much the
better to fall before the lion than the wolf" (3.1.126-34). Almost
immediately, however, Olivia is again driven to prioritise her intense
passion over both her social position and her maidenly virtue: she is
unable to restrain herself in the end from swearing "by maidhood, honor,
truth, and everything" that she loves Viola (3.1.111-20, 3.1.145-56,
3.4.201-05). Despite her desperate words, Olivia nevertheless still
hopes even at this point to preserve her status and reputation for
virtue by conducting a secret affair with Cesario: she reminds herself
not to "speak too loud" as she wonders what to ''bestow of him, since
youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd," and tells Viola that
she will deny her nothing "that honor, sav'd, may upon asking give"
(3.4.2-4, 3.4.211-12).

It is not until Olivia finds herself experiencing abject terror at the
thought of her beloved fighting a duel with Sir Toby that she is finally
forced to acknowledge the depth of her attachment. She curses Sir Toby
at this point, not so much for endangering Cesario's life as for
"start\[ing\] one poor heart of mine, in thee," with the result that she
can now no longer blind herself to her love, or seek to minimise the
price which she will have to pay in terms of loss of status in order to
secure her beloved's affection (4.1.64-59). Having experienced this
exasperating epiphany, she abandons her dignity and modesty completely
and, after shamelessly shepherding Sebastian back to the house
regardless of the presence of five onlookers, marries him with
indecorous haste, so that her "most jealous and too doubtful soul may
live at peace" (4.1.64, 4.3.22-28). From now on she has no interest in
maintaining her social standing, as she shows when she casually leaves
it to Sebastian to decide when their marriage will be
"celebrat\[ed\]...according to my birth" (4.3.28-31). Her new found
humility and self-restraint are shown at the end of the play, when her
response to Viola apparently denying their marriage in the most cowardly
and fickle manner possible is simply to plead abjectly with her beloved
not to desert her (5.1.146-50, 5.1.170-71). The near silence which the
countess maintains after learning that she has in fact married Sebastian
illustrates this new restraint perfectly: she is perhaps reflecting that
this match is as close as she is likely to come to marrying Viola, and
will at least ensure that she can preserve a connection with her
beloved. (Unbeknownst to her, however, her humble passion may even reap
its full reward, since Sebastian undoubtedly has the same capacity for
loyal devotion as his sister.)

Overall, Olivia's story is designed to show that, unlike sensual
desire--which will no doubt play an ongoing role in all three of the
play's romantic relationships--pride is completely incompatible with the
humble devotion which deep attachments demand. Olivia's desperate
struggle to secure Cesario's love contrasts sharply and ironically with
the poised solemnity of her mourning in act 1. Over the course of the
play she gradually disentangles herself from the pride which has exposed
her to the influence of conventional conceptions of piety, social rank
and honour, substituting for the artificial restraints that these codes
impose a humbler discipline which flows naturally from the recognition
that love can deliver far more substantial rewards. Whereas sensualists
can begin to fulfil their deeper needs simply by caring for others, the
portrayal of Olivia implies that it is often particularly difficult for
proud souls to acknowledge and prioritise their passions, because they
are so prone to be swayed by these artificial demands. Her story
suggests, however, that passionate individuals are in the end unlikely
to be ruled by pride because it does not provide the intrinsic
satisfactions for which they yearn, however unconsciously.

Comparisons and contrasts between the subplot and the main plot deepen
Shakespeare's analysis of the ways in which pride, sensuality and deep
attachment affect relationships. Broadly speaking, Malvolio's pride
parallels Olivia's, but whereas the countess is progressively humbled by
her passion for Viola, her steward is irremediably "sick of self-love"
(1.5.90).[^7] Malvolio's Puritan creed has, however, taught him that he
can only achieve his ambitions in this world and the next through
disciplined service (2.3.140). The emphasis which he places on
moderation and restraint, and particularly his opposition to drinking
and bear baiting, are typical of his sect (2.5.7-8). His pious sense of
duty runs so deep that even in his--supposedly--private fantasies about
becoming "Count Malvolio," his ambition expresses itself as a desire to
quell Sir Toby with "an austere regard of control" (2.5.35-80). It
should not be forgotten that he is following his mistress's orders,
sometimes word for word, when he rebukes Sir Toby for his rowdiness,
however much he might also relish the opportunity to patronise his
social superiors (2.3.86-101, 1.3.3-6, 2.3.72-74). In fact, Olivia
relies on Malvolio heavily in her dealings with Viola as well as Sir
Toby, since he is "discreet," "sad and civil" (1.5.95-96, 3.4.5-7,
1.5.139-64, 1.5.299-307, 2.2.1-16). The countess shows her gratitude for
the valuable role that he has played in her household at the end of the
play, when she makes a serious effort to redress his wrongs (5.1.280,
5.1.345-55, 5.1.379).

Maria realises that she can fool Malvolio easily by appealing to his
vanity, since he "is so cramm'd (as he thinks) with excellencies that it
is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him" (2.3.50-53).
By encouraging the steward to "cast off \[his\] humble slough" and "be
proud" in the knowledge that Olivia loves him, Maria's fake letter
exposes the vanity which underlies his dutiful piety (2.5.148-49,
2.5.161). Whereas Olivia has sublimated her desire for praise into pious
devotion, Malvolio is vulnerable to Maria's trick because he pursues
secular advancement as avidly as divine grace -indeed his faith seems to
draw little distinction between the two. Encouraged by the letter,
Malvolio discards all restraint, and becomes convinced that "Jove" is
supporting his ambition in an immediate, material way, rather than, as
formerly, merely promising rewards in an afterlife in return for
punctilious service (2.5.172-73; see also 2.5.178). The letter exposes a
Malvolio whose passions are stunted or distorted, as his name implies,
since he is unerotic himself, and concerned with Olivia's alleged love
only as a means of advancement. Once he has discarded his piety and
pursuit of praise, there is nothing in his nature to restrain his
overweening ambition. His assumption that smiles and laughter are
conscious performances, to be forced or "quench\[ed\]," is one of many
indications in the play that he is a stranger to the moderating
influence of ordinary human companionship (1.5.86-88, 2.5.65-66,
2.5.178-79). He lacks the "generous...and...free...disposition" which
ensures that even Viola's most mundane transactions are regulated by a
sort of natural justice, based on the spontaneous flow of mutual trust
and gratitude (1.5.91-93).

Audaciously (but in an understandably indirect fashion), Shakespeare has
Feste rehearse the principal tenets of Malvolio's faith when, disguised
as a parson, he attempts to persuade the steward that his
"complain\[ts\]...of obstruction" in the dark cell where he is
imprisoned are simply symptoms of his deranged "ignorance," since his
confinement is in fact nothing more than a diabolical delusion
(4.2.34-44). This assertion, when combined with the fool's insistence
that Malvolio can only free himself by subscribing to the Pythagorean
doctrine that "the soul of our grandam might happily inhabit a bird,"
could be seen as a veiled allusion to the doctrine of salvation by
faith: just as there is no real suffering apart from that which stems
from resistance to God's will, so the only true emancipation is that
granted to the elect in the afterlife as a reward for their
determination to remain faithful in the face of the tribulations which
they will inevitably endure in a fallen world (4.2.50-60). Malvolio's
angry rejection of Feste's catechism suggests that he has been radically
disillusioned, or, one might say, enlightened by his unjust treatment:
his repeated assertion that no hell could be darker than his cell
suggests that he is determined from now on to trust only the evidence
which the material world provides his own senses, and will never again
allow himself to be reconciled to his lot by divine rewards or sanctions
(4.2.33-47). His parting thrust-- "I'll be reveng'd on the whole pack of
you"--also implies that he has finally cast aside the constraints
imposed by his pursuit of worldly advancement (5.1.378). The folly of
his worldly ambitions must have been brought home to him by the fact
that the mistress whom he has served so loyally has, for a while at
least, forgotten about him completely (5.1.279-80).

Although the play focuses mainly on the role that justice plays in
personal relationships, it undoubtedly also has a political dimension.
Malvolio's engrained gracelessness is exposed when he angrily rejects
Olivia's considerate proposal--borne of guilt and a lasting sense of
obligation to a loyal servant--that they conduct a formal trial of his
persecutors, in which he himself would be "both the plaintif and the
judge," in favour of an indiscriminate revenge (5.1.351-55, 5.1.378).
Far from humbling his pride, his suffering seems to have liberated it
from the moderating influence which was previously exerted by his piety
and desire for praise. Clearly, sensualists are equally prone to be
tyrannical: when Orsino's desire for Olivia, which "can give no place,
bide no denay," is finally thwarted, the duke's sexual frustration
manifests itself in a rage which is at least as boorish as Malvolio's
spiteful outburst (2.4.124, 5.1.117-31).

In contrast with the outbursts of anger which punctuate much of the
final act (see also 5.1.69-72, 5.1.206-07), it is significant that both
Viola and Olivia maintain a careful restraint when under even greater
stress than Orsino and Malvolio. Ironically, the only such outburst
which comes close to being proportional is that which Antonio mistakenly
directs at Viola for not returning his purse, for, as her heartfelt
reply indicates, "ingratitude" is the worst of all vices, presumably
because it "taint\[s\]" the intimate attachments which Shakespeare
presents as the ultimate good (3.4.347-70, 5.1.76-92). Unlike Plato, who
argues that all non-philosophers must be driven by physical desire and
are therefore inherently unjust--because the body is of course
ineluctably private--Shakespeare suggests both here and throughout the
play that human nature is generally biased towards justice, since it is
innately disposed to form bonds of mutual gratitude.[^8] Shakespeare's
disagreements with Plato arise from his belief that attachment is a
distinct behavioural system, which stimulates a powerful desire for
harmonious intimacy that is often in tension with the baser bodily
drives, which are indeed potentially tyrannical.[^9]

Nevertheless, Olivia needs someone like the loveless, but dutiful
Malvolio, who finds it congenial to maintain order by threats, to
control sensualists who are restrained neither by an innate sense of
obligation nor by conventional piety. Sir Toby is typical of a "rough
and inhospitable" country: Illyria, situated in the western part of the
Balkan peninsula, was generally associated with piracy and drunkenness
in Shakespeare's day (3.3.8-11, 5.1.51-63).[^10] Like Plato's guardians,
however, the steward is only useful as long as he believes in salutary
myths which valorise humble service.[^11] A thoroughly enlightened
Malvolio not only loses this usefulness, but becomes a dangerous figure,
since it is an easy step to convert his ambition into an attack on the
whole social order, once he has discarded the beliefs which have
previously motivated his dutiful service. The educated and gentlemanly
steward, who has previously "con\[ned\] state without book" and now
intends to read "politic authors," whose demand for a far more radical
justice--as he conceives it--than Olivia can offer him, is now
restrained neither by convention nor nature, and who is no stranger to
legal proceedings, is perfectly capable of turning his world upside down
(4.2.82, 2.3.149-50, 2.5.161, 5.1.275-77). Malvolio's pride is
ultimately more dangerous to society that Sir Toby's sensuality,
although it is easier to control through habituation.

Sir Andrew's decision to change his "dun" stockings to what he imagines
to be a more fetching colour invites particular comparison with
Malvolio: both characters are tricked into pursuing Olivia and both are
easy to flatter because they are ruled by self-love (1.3.101,
1.3.115-20, 1.3.125-41). Sir Andrew is too competitive to engage
passionately in any relationship, and, like Malvolio, is less focused on
desiring others than on being "ador'd" himself (1.3.123-24, 2.3.31-34,
2.3.81-83, 2.3.181). His flirtation with Maria is completely unerotic,
as she slyly hints, while his courtship of Olivia is an entirely
artificial affair (1.3.69-79, 3.1.86-91). His passions, such as they
are, seem to be primarily sensual: he "delight\[s\] in masques and
revels," dances enthusiastically and was born under Taurus, which is
ruled by Venus (1.3.113-33).

Whereas Malvolio has been taught by his religion to take pride in his
virtue, Sir Andrew is fashionably scornful of piety, which means that he
has only his sense of honour to limit his feckless pursuit of
stimulation and kudos (1.3.83-84, 2.3.140-46, 3.2.31-32). As Olivia's
contrasting judgements of Sir Andrew and Malvolio indicate, the code of
honour is much less useful to society than Christian virtue, presumably
because it is less likely to exert a moderating influence over its
adherents (1.3.15-17). There is no doubt, however, that it controls the
knight's behaviour rigidly in a variety of contexts. Not only does Sir
Andrew's sense of honour make him "a great quarreller," despite his
cowardice, and impel him to overcome his reluctance to "accost" Maria
romantically, but it also imposes a code of virtue of sorts: he eschews
"policy" as shameful and feels that he must win Olivia purely by "valor"
(1.3.58-79, 1.3.30, 3.2.28-32).

The challenge which Sir Andrew pens after being persuaded that he can
only earn Olivia's regard by fighting a duel with Viola reveals with
naïve clarity the true cost of honour, rather in the same way as Feste's
"sermon" arguably conveys the essence of Puritan teaching regarding the
price of eternal life (3.4.147-70). Although the foolish knight--whose
name ironically means 'manly'--searches for the swaggering tone that Sir
Toby recommends, he cannot suppress his underlying anxiety: "if it be
thy chance to kill me...thou kill'st me like a rogue and villain"
(3.4.160-63). His instinctive fear exposes the artificiality of the
insouciance which more sophisticated honour-lovers strive to project: "a
swaggering accent...gives manhood more approbation than ever proof
itself would have earn'd him" (3.4.280-310, 3.4.180-82). It seems that
Sir Andrew must distort his nature almost as much as Malvolio in order
to win praise.

However, despite this quite considerable outlay of effort, the rewards
which Sir Andrew gains are insubstantial. The motive for the duel with
Cesario is of course to win praise and honour rather than the intrinsic
pleasures of a passionate attachment: Sir Andrew informs Viola, quite
accurately, that "\[Olivia\] uses thee kindly. But...that is not the
matter I challenge thee for" (3.4.155-57). The responses of the three
female characters to the code of honour provide the natural standard by
which its conventional demands can be measured: Sir Andrew's forced
gallantry makes as little impact on Olivia as Orsino's sensuality, while
the anxiety which Viola feels when confronted with the foolish knight's
challenge and Maria's worries about Sir Toby offering to be his second
against Malvolio are surpassed only by the sheer terror which the
countess feels at the prospect of her beloved risking his life in a duel
(1.3.15-17, 3.4.226-72, 2.3.126-33, 4.1.45-51). The fear and
mystification which the three women exhibit are a measure of the extent
to which honour entices its adherents into a sort of closed, artificial
loop, substituting for the virtuous circle of gratitude and requital
which could fulfil their deeper needs a diligent and absorbing pursuit
of entirely illusory rewards.

Like Olivia, however, albeit on a much more trivial level, Sir Andrew
proves himself to be capable of turning away from his pursuit of
prestige. An unobtrusive pun underlines the extent to which the foolish
knight's pride has been deflated by the end of the play: Sir Toby picks
out Sir Andrew's conceit to attack by calling him "a coxcomb" just after
the foolish knight has twice lamented the "bloody coxcomb" which
Sebastian has given him (5.1.190-207). Significantly, it is precisely at
this humiliating moment that Sir Andrew is able to show real concern for
Sir Toby for the first time, worrying about his friend's wound as well
as his own and suggesting that they are "dress'd together" (5.1.172-76,
5.1.204-05). Thus we can infer that Sir Andrew, Malvolio and Olivia all
ultimately recognise the futility of their diligent, joyless efforts to
gain prestige, whether through courage, pious ascetism or dutiful
service, although they are clearly not all equally capable of aligning
themselves with their deeper passions after achieving this insight.

Just as Sir Andrew and Malvolio offer a bathetic parallel to Olivia's
pride, so Sir Toby's sensuality is a grosser version of Orsino's. Like
the music demanded by Orsino in the opening scene, the song which Sir
Toby requests highlights the ephemerality of physical desire: "kiss me
sweet and twenty; youth's a stuff will not endure" (2.3.51-52). His
alcohol-fuelled attempt to spin out his sensual pleasures indefinitely
is cruder than Orsino's: rather than retreating to "love-thoughts" like
the duke, he simply refuses to accept that the Christmas festivities
must end (as the play's title of course reminds us), maintaining against
all the evidence that "not to be abed after midnight is to be up
betimes" (2.3.4-13).

Ironically, however, Shakespeare shows that the natural desire to
perpetuate physical pleasure imposes cares even at the lower, more
sensual end of what one might call the erotic hierarchy: just as, on a
somewhat higher level, Orsino tries to exploit Olivia's caring nature as
an antidote to the frustrating "sicken\[ing\]" of his "appetite," so Sir
Toby can only sustain his riotous life style by working hard to convince
Sir Andrew that he still has a chance of winning Olivia's hand
(1.3.20-22, 1.3.88-112). He is often, therefore, much more calculating
than is immediately apparent, as we can see when he warns Maria
cryptically to be on her best behaviour when he sees the foolish knight
approaching (1.3.42-43).[^12] Despite his initial bravado, he is
increasingly alert to the dangers of alienating Olivia (4.2.66-71).

Not only is Sir Toby's life therefore less care-free than he would wish,
but his outlay of effort represents a poor investment, for sensual
pleasure, however frequently repeated, will always be cancelled out by
the pain of a "dying fall." At the same time, however, he
dismisses--initially, at least--more prudent outlays of effort, which
would yield more durable returns: whereas Orsino understands enough of
love to appreciate that Olivia's mourning is a sign of her capacity to
form deeply rewarding attachments, the drunken knight brands such "care"
simply "an enemy to life" (1.3.1-3). Since he is at first exclusively
bent on pursuing physical gratification--which is, as we have seen,
inevitably a solitary business--he has even less reason than Orsino to
engage in the cycle of gratitude and requital which invariably drives
intimate attachments: he is, for instance, completely unmoved by
Olivia's request, as conveyed by Maria as well as Malvolio, that he
"confine himself within the modest limits of order," even though he is
dependent on the countess for his bed and board (1.3.4-13). Sir Toby's
casual nihilism reflects the fact that in freeing himself from the cares
of love, he has forfeited its substantial rewards: thus he shrugs off
Maria's adoration at first--"What o' that?"--and brusquely dismisses the
duke's concern for his injuries -"That's all one" (2.3.179-180,
5.1.196-97).[^13]

However, even Sir Toby realises in the end that he can only secure
lasting happiness by working to reciprocate the care of those who love
him. He shows even less desire for the diminutive Maria than Orsino does
for Viola in her male guise, but eventually marries her to "recompense"
her for her gulling of Malvolio and her absolutely consistent loyalty:
"she's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me" (2.5.182-85,
5.1.362-64, 2.3.179-80). Perhaps Sir Toby's anger regarding the
unreliability of the doctor who was to have dressed his wounds-- "I hate
a drunken rogue"--reflects a new understanding that the contracts which
supply our needs cannot be fulfilled without self-discipline
(5.1.200-01; see also 1.5.26-28). By rejecting Sir Andrew so
conclusively at the end of the play, thus ensuring that he can no longer
finance his riotous life style, he perhaps signals his readiness to
accept the constraints of married life: "Shall I play my freedom at
tray-trip, and become thy bond-slave?" (2.5.190-91). Certainly, any care
or generosity which Sir Toby is able to display in fulfilling his
marital contract would be bound to be more productive than his previous
machinations, since he would be working to secure Maria's witty company
and loyal affection rather than an endless repetition of ephemeral
pleasure. Indeed, it is significant that none of the four main
relationships in the play are primarily sexual, although two of them
involve habitual, self-confessed sensualists. This is not to deny that
sensuality is more compatible with deep attachments than pride: it is
significant that Orsino and Sir Toby are given the space to mature
gradually and partially, whereas Olivia has to be forced by her own
underlying needs into an abrupt and painful reappraisal of her
priorities.

As befits the subplot, Maria is less obviously heroic than Viola and
Antonio--although Sir Toby is only half joking when he calls her
Penthesilea (2.3.177)--but there is no doubt that she is equally devoted
to her beloved. Her name might suggest that Catholicism is more
compatible with deep attachments than Puritanism, at least insofar as
the former tends to prioritise loving kindness over faith.[^14] Her
'adoration' of Sir Toby has triggered a determined effort to restrain
his behaviour, which is partly motivated by a desperate fear of losing
him if he were to be "turn\[ed\]...out of doors" by Olivia (1.5.27-28,
2.3.179-80, 1.3.4-14, 2.3.72-74). As with Antonio and Olivia, it seems
that her desire to possess her beloved has provoked a fierce urge to
protect him. As we have seen, she actually agrees with the substance of
Malvolio's rebuke of Sir Toby, and only turns against him when he
directly threatens his interests--and therefore hers--by vowing to
report her beloved's "uncivil rule" to Olivia (2.3.72-74, 2.3.85,
2.3.103, 2.3.121-25). Her scheme to dupe Malvolio actually originates as
a hasty attempt to distract Sir Toby from his determination to act as
Sir Andrew's second in a duel with the steward: she begs the drunken
knight to "be patient for to-night," warning him that Olivia is "much
out of quiet" after her encounter with Viola, and immediately develops a
plan which does not require his direct involvement, but which is
guaranteed to keep him equally entertained (2.3.126-137).

Maria's strategies, like Antonio's, serve a dual purpose, since they are
designed not only to protect her beloved, but to inspire his undying
gratitude. Like Viola and Olivia, Maria has to deal with her beloved's
initial indifference: her diminutive stature is the concrete embodiment
of her insignificance in Sir Toby's eyes, and perhaps also its cause,
since her physical appearance would have probably been his foremost
concern at first (1.5.204-05, 2.5.13). Undaunted, however, she shows
herself to be courageous as well as witty in her attempt to captivate
her beloved, for, as Malvolio reminds her, she is risking her own
position by supporting the drunken knight (2.3.121-24). Through sheer
tenacity she gradually gains Sir Toby's respect: he compares her both to
gold--precious of course partly because it is completely unchanging--and
to "a beagle true bred," presumably because she makes up in persistence
what she lacks in size (2.5.14, 2.3.179). When her scheme succeeds, Sir
Toby vows to "follow" her "to the gates of Tartar" (2.5.204-06). In sum,
Maria gives Sir Toby the same loyal, diligent care that Viola and
Antonio offer Orsino and Sebastian, although each tailor their devotion
in slightly different ways to fit their beloveds' needs. Essentially,
the same erotic contract proves effective in all three cases, which
suggests that it is the most natural way for courting lovers to proceed.

Feste is truly a philosopher by most definitions, since he has a curious
mind, well suited to abstract thought. Since his way of explaining his
movement between the two households makes "Foolery" resemble philosophy
in its universalism--it "does walk about the orb like the sun, it shines
everywhere"--it is particularly significant that he sees Viola's
peregrinations as a sign that she is a kindred spirit (3.1.38-41). The
two characters certainly display a similar degree of scepticism as they
exchange a series of jokes which depend on viewing the Church from a
purely material perspective: Feste is connected to churches only in the
literal sense of living next door to one, which means that, as Viola
seems to suggest, he is in fact being exploited by those who do actually
"live by the church" and therefore "stand...by \[his\] tabor"--for the
clown's music presumably helps him to pay his tithes--but offer him no
substantial recompense for his efforts (3.1.1-10). It is Viola who
extends the covert satire on the artificiality and injustice of the
established order to include the secular hierarchy: "the king lies by a
beggar" (3.1.8). She shows, moreover, that she can match Feste's level
of insight--and, as we have also seen throughout the play, the subtlety
of his rhetoric--precisely by registering the flexible awareness of
"mood...quality of persons, and the time"--"as full of labor as a wise
man's art"--which allows him to "check at every feather" in order to
accommodate his wit to his various audiences (3.1.60-68).[^15] Like
Shakespeare himself, and Plato and Aristophanes before him, these two
philosophical characters both know how to use comedy to conceal
controversial opinions.[^16] Viola differs from Feste, however, in that
she invariably uses her capacity for sympathetic insight to endear
herself to her interlocutor.

However, there are sharp contrasts between the two characters: Although
Viola is as happy to mock the Church as Feste, she draws back from him
as soon as he extends his scepticism to loyal attachments, realising
that the fool "care\[s\] for nothing," since he presents "words \[as\]
very rascals, since bonds disgraced them," virtue as purely a matter of
preserving one's "name," and loyal husbands simply as fools (2.3.14-35).
The strategies by which Viola endears herself to Olivia are as
intelligent and unconventional as Feste's, but her passionate evocation
of absolute fidelity is in every other respect the polar opposite of the
fool's coolly cynical attitude towards his mistress's devout constancy
(1.5.64-74, 1.5.139-49, 1.5.264-76). Whereas Feste questions any attempt
to transcend the mutability of the world, whether inspired by natural
passion or conventional beliefs, Viola, who is "sick" for love, focuses
all her intelligence on the task of establishing an enduring friendship
with Orsino (3.1.46-53). Ironically, however, it is precisely Feste's
prioritisation of truth over friendship which cuts him off from
understanding the most important truths: he leaves the joys of love
completely out of account when he claims that he is "the better for
\[his\] foes and the worse for \[his\] friends," since only the former
tell him his faults bluntly (5.1.12-26).

There are signs, however, that Feste's cynicism is not primarily
philosophical, but springs from a fear of being deceived: "He that is
well hang'd in this world needs to fear no colors" (1.5.3-6). His
underlying nature is passionate, as perhaps must be true of those who
are of a genuinely philosophical disposition: his uncharacteristic
reluctance to receive payment for the song he performs for Orsino on the
grounds that he "take\[s\] pleasure in singing," implies that he is as
deeply affected as the duke by the idea of a loyal, but rejected lover,
dying of grief, and furthermore that he has for once actually enjoyed
sharing this feeling with his audience (2.4.51-71). This unique display
of passion--which contrasts sharply with his earlier acceptance of a
double payment for the song celebrating "present mirth"--could suggest
that he is drawing on his own experience of "bonds disgrac\[ing\]" the
"words" which purported to seal them forever (2.3.31-38, 3.1.20-21).

Feste protects himself from loss and betrayal by withdrawing from deep
attachments, while using his sceptical philosophy to justify this
retreat on the grounds that absolute constancy is beyond the scope of
human nature: "virtue that transgresses is but patch'd with sin, and sin
that amends is but patch'd with virtue" (1.5.47-52). His continual
oscillation between the two households, his repulsion of Maria's and
Viola's friendly advances and his surly treatment of Sebastian are all
indicative of this habitual and deliberate detachment (1.5.1-6,
3.1.28-30, 4.1.1-23).[^17] Having consciously disengaged himself both
from conventional moral codes and from the natural graciousness which
encourages passionate individuals to fulfil their obligations, whether
personal or professional, Feste is no more diligent in attending to
Orsino than he is to Olivia -or even to Sir Toby and Maria, who expect
him to be present when Malvolio reads the planted letter (2.4.8-14,
2.3.173-75). Thus, although his opening admonition of Olivia undoubtedly
helps her to understand that constancy has its natural limits, it turns
out also to be symptomatic of his own more radical rejection of all
pretensions to fidelity.

In the light of his reductive conclusion that human nature is inherently
fickle, Feste has scaled down his erotic needs to focus purely on
physical pleasure: "As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so
beauty's a flower" (1.5.51-52). Consequently, he keeps a mistress,
although like Sir Toby and Orsino, he has discovered that even the most
reductively sensual "pleasure will be paid, one time or another": "My
lady has a white hand, and the Mermidons are no bottle-ale houses"
(2.4.70-71, 2.3.27-28). Thus, although he avoids both the risks and the
effort involved in deep emotional investment, he still needs to extend
himself even to earn fleeting and nugatory rewards. Feste's ambiguous
name associates his continual pursuit of diversion with decay, which
underscores the point that his cynical acceptance of impermanence is no
more likely to fulfil his deeper needs than Olivia's idealistic
determination to remain devoted to her brother's memory forever.

However, Feste's philosophy does offer him an enticing--if ultimately
illusory--substitute for the substantial and lasting satisfactions of
intimacy which it has encouraged him to forfeit, since it continually
bolsters his sense of superiority to those who strive to achieve some
degree of constancy in their lives. His underlying pride is exposed most
clearly when he casually punishes Malvolio for belittling him earlier at
the start of the play by delaying the delivery of the letter that would
have secured the steward's release (5.1.370-77). (Unlike Sir Toby, he is
sufficiently detached from prudential considerations to run the risk of
incurring Olivia's wrath in order to extend Malvolio's torment
-4.2.66-71). It is typical of Feste that, notwithstanding the fact that
he has clearly been harbouring a lasting grudge, he manages to present
his gloating over Malvolio's humiliation as an expression of serene
resignation to an all-pervading mutability: "thus the whirligig of time
brings in his revenges" (5.1.376-77). Thus, far from restraining his
vanity, Feste's philosophising enables him to justify and rationalise it
in a way that further bolsters his sense of his own superiority.

Although Feste and Sir Toby both use the phrase "that's all one," as a
sort of verbal shrug to express their casual cynicism (5.1.196,
5.1.373), the fool's philosophical resignation to a mutability which he
sees as all-encompassing has fostered a much more radical nihilism than
the sensualists of the play could ever countenance: "many a good hanging
prevents a bad marriage" (1.5.19-20). Feste's response to Maria's
warning that Olivia will hang or banish him for his prolonged
absence--\"for turning away, let summer bear it out"--undoubtedly shows
that he is less attached to life than those who have more reason to
live, but again he seems to be using his sceptical philosophy to repress
his real feelings, for he prays that his "wit...put \[him\] into good
fooling" as soon as he is left on his own, and then delivers a
performance which seems carefully calculated to regain his mistress's
approval (1.5.20, 1.5.32-33). Similarly, he gives Viola the impression
that his wanderings are entirely free-spirited, but he is clearly more
intent on earning tips than he admits, and there are signs that he has
resorted to Orsino's court partly because he has found the grieving
Olivia to be less generous than her more frivolous father (3.1.31-39,
2.4.11-12, 3.1.49-55, 2.3.25-28, 3.1.43-55, 5.1.29-49).[^18] Although he
is indeed largely disengaged, we can infer from these contradictions
that Feste exaggerates his indifference to his instinctive need to make
a living, presumably in order to impress his listeners, or perhaps to
convince himself of his superiority to those who are more prudently
attached to life because they are less radically resigned to their own
fleetingness and insignificance.

Ironically, therefore--for he is undoubtedly indifferent to honour and
status as they are conventionally conceived--Feste's philosophy
functions in the same way as Malvolio's piety, since it enables him to
repress his true needs, while bolstering his proud sense of superiority
to an ephemeral world. This parallel is underscored by the fact that
Feste and Malvolio are the only characters who show absolutely no signs
of passionate attachment at any point in the play.[^19] The contrasts
between the fool and Viola on the other hand seem designed to indicate
that, far from constituting a ruling passion in its own right, as in the
Platonic tradition, philosophy tends to be simply an expression of pride
when it is not regulated by love. Indeed, of the various forms of pride
which Shakespeare explores--Protestant piety, honour, whether maidenly
or macho, the hauteur born of high social rank--philosophical pride is
perhaps the most insidious. Feste is as unjust in his dealings with
others as he is unfulfilled in his personal life: he is as proud as
Malvolio, Olivia and Sir Andrew, but, unlike them, is a "corrupter of
words," who sees virtue purely as a conventional matter of preserving
one's "name," and as sensual as Orsino and Sir Toby, but, unlike them,
deliberately eschews loyalty (3.1.14-36).

Feste's final song goes well beyond the fool's own perspective to
provide a covert overview of the play's themes: whereas in what might be
called the first phase of desire, one instinctively pursues sensual
pleasures--"A foolish thing was but a toy"--in the second, one naturally
seeks to secure a more lasting contentment, taking care to "shut \[the\]
gate" of one's "estate," thus creating a small enclave of justice in a
world of "knaves and thieves" (5.1.389-96). Marriage, described earlier
by the priest with unexpected solemnity as "a contract of eternal bond
of love," is the typical expression of this urge, but marriages only
succeed when both parties are prepared to prioritise their mutual
devotion over their pride: "when I came, alas, to wive...by swaggering
could I never thrive" (5.1.156-61, 5.1.397-99). The reward for those who
protect their "estate" and avoid "swaggering" is lasting contentment:
they "still \[have\] drunken heads," even when old age restricts them to
their "beds" (5.1.401-03). The last verse concludes the argument with
unobtrusive precision: actors illustrate the balance which lovers strike
between pleasure and care in a committed relationship, as they "strive
to please...every day" (5.1.408).

Of course, these little enclaves of justice cannot resist the inevitable
depredations of nature forever, for "the rain it raineth every day," but
this larger philosophical perspective is irrelevant to lovers: "A great
while ago the world begun...but that's all one" (5.1.392 and passim,
5.1.405-07). The force of this latter phrase, previously expressive of
Feste's and Sir Toby's nihilism, is completely reversed at this point,
since it is now used precisely to reject philosophical perspectives
which adduce the ultimate ephemerality of lovers' efforts to protect
their "estate" as proof of their insignificance (compare 5.1.196,
5.1.373). This reversal of meaning provides a hint that Feste's
enigmatic song conveys Shakespeare's own overview of the play rather
than the fool's: the second and fourth verse remind us of the diligence
of the constant lover and how it is rewarded, while the first, third and
fifth focus respectively on the ways in which sensual pleasure, pride
and philosophical detachment can obstruct this process.

Feste's final song reminds us that time is central to the theme of the
play. The problem with sensual desire is its ephemerality, whereas
'swaggerers' are frequently deluded into thinking that they can
transcend their own mortality, whether through faith in divine
providence, or through sceptical philosophy, which drains humanity of
its significance by viewing all actions *sub specie aeternitatis*.
Between these two extremes erotic contracts represent a humble, but
determined effort on the part of lovers to secure their substantial
pleasures against "the wind and the rain" for as long as possible.

Antonio, Viola and Maria are the characters who protect their "estate"
most effectively, since they prioritise their love over all other
desires and fears, working hard to safeguard the welfare of the beloved
on whom their happiness depends, and above all to inspire their
gratitude and trusting reliance through a noble display of courage and
generosity. Although lovers usually strive to present this display as
entirely altruistic, lest they introduce a divisive note in a
relationship which they wish to portray as absolutely harmonious, their
apparent self-denial is in fact strategically designed to secure the
ultimate good of a lasting attachment, even if they also relish the
sacrifices which are the necessary means to this end. The
Antonio/Sebastian relationship reveals the nature of erotic transactions
with relative clarity: the ultimate aim is to secure a deep intimacy,
but this is only available in perfectly just relationships, where both
lovers appreciate that happiness needs to be earnt through diligent
investments of care and acknowledge fully the binding nature of the
obligations which these investments create.

In contrast, Orsino and Sir Toby embody the initial, sensual phase of
passion, which seems to offer immediate, carefree satisfaction-- "a
foolish thing was but a toy"--although in fact even sensual pleasures
usually need to be "paid" for, in however minimal a way (2.4.70-71). As
Shakespeare's metaphor implies, however, these pleasures represent an
immature stage in the natural development of desire, since they are
always shadowed by a painful awareness of their brevity. Orsino and Sir
Toby both show a nascent understanding that the rewards of a loyal,
intimate attachment are more substantial than their habitual pleasures.
To gain this ultimate good, however, sensual lovers have to moderate
their physical appetites, which are of course ineluctably private, and
strive to unite with their beloveds as far as is possible by diligently
reciprocating their sympathetic care.

Unlike sexual desire, pride has no place at all in deep attachments: Sir
Andrew, Malvolio, Feste and--at least in the first half of the
play--Olivia herself all fail to "thrive" in their relationships because
of their penchant for various types of "swaggering." Shakespeare
constantly teaches that the rewards of pride are not only illusory, but
actually form an obstacle to true fulfilment, since the trust and
gratitude on which deep attachments are founded can only be earnt
through humility and self-denial. Pride exposes one to the distracting
influence of the various codes and conventions which offer an
all-absorbing alternative to deep attachments, granting insubstantial
rewards in a sort of closed loop to those who fulfil their rigorous,
joyless demands through their demonstrations of bravado, ascetism, or
dutiful service. Whereas Olivia is close enough to her deeper needs to
sacrifice piety, honour and social status in order to pursue a constant
attachment, those, like Malvolio, who are more proud than passionate
have no reason to reject these conventions apart from their own
intrinsic futility.

Of the two great systems which control the behaviour of these less
erotic characters­, namely Protestant piety and the code of honour, the
former is more useful to society, since it channels pride into dutiful
care, reinforcing the natural desire to win praise with the promise of
eternal life. However, although the pious man's disciplined service may
outwardly resemble the lover's, it can only be sustained through
systematic indoctrination, since its rewards lack intrinsic
satisfaction. Although Shakespeare acknowledges that pride and
sensuality are naturally tyrannical when not restrained by conventional
codes of behaviour, he also implies that human society has an innate
bias towards justice, since attachments constantly create obligations
which exert a pervasive influence over even quite humdrum social
transactions.

Shakespeare portrays philosophy as regulated either by love or pride,
rather than as a ruling passion in its own right. Philosophers are well
placed to become successful lovers, since they can understand the nature
of their beloved and ignore social convention when pursuing them.
Philosophical pride, on the other hand, originates in a self-protective
impulse to retreat from deep attachments, which is justified by
interpreting inconstancy as a manifestation of an all-encompassing
mutability. This apparent insight encourages proud philosophers to scale
down their desires and their investment of effort to focus narrowly on
sensual gratification. In return for forfeiting the intrinsic
satisfactions of passionate constancy, such philosophers gain a
pervasive, if unacknowledged, sense of their own superiority to the
attachments and dogmas which claim to offer a more lasting alternative
to their transient pleasures. They are in fact nihilists, however, for
the rewards of pride and sensuality are too insubstantial to provide
them with a sustaining purpose -although they are nevertheless still
instinctively attached to life, and therefore constrained to make a
living in ways which conflict with their stance of carefree resignation
to an all-pervading mutability. Philosophers of this sort are unjust in
their dealings with others as well as unfulfilled in themselves, since
their scepticism regarding any form of constancy, whether natural or
conventional, allows them to deny their obligations, while not
preventing them from harbouring spiteful grudges when their pride has
been wounded.

In sum, truly passionate lovers are naturally just, since they recognise
that they need to make a humble and determined effort to serve their
beloved in order to experience the substantial benefits of a loyal,
intimate relationship. Although their investments are likely to be
presented as disinterested gifts, the value of their returns tends to be
directly proportional to the amount of care which they devote to
developing an intimate attachment. In contrast, the rewards gained by
sensual hedonists are fleeting and insubstantial, while the efforts of
'swaggerers'--whether status-conscious, pious, honour-loving or
philosophical--are radically misdirected, since they yield only illusory
returns, while preventing them from ever acquiring the humility of the
true lover.

[^1]: W. H. Auden, *Lectures on Shakespeare*, ed. Arthur C. Kirsch
    (Princeton New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000): 152-58;
    Valerie Forman, *Tragicomic Redemptions: Global Economics and the
    Early Modern English Stage* (Philadelphia: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, 2008): 53. All references to the play are from
    *The Riverside Shakespeare*, ed. G. Blakemore Evans et al. (Boston:
    Houghton Mifflin Company, 1997).

[^2]: Richard Burrow, "Fulfilment in *As You Like It*," *Interpretation:
    a Journal of Political Philosophy* 41/2, Fall (2014): 91-122.

[^3]: A. S. Leggatt, "*Twelfth Night*," in "*Twelfth Night": Critical
    Essays*, ed. Stanley Wells (London: Garland Publishing Inc., 1986):
    251; Barbara Everett, "Or What You Will," in *"Twelfth Night"; New
    Casebooks* ed. R. S. White (London: Macmillan Press Ltd., 1996):
    211-12.

[^4]: Dympna Callaghan, "Body Politics and *Twelfth Night*," in
    *"Twelfth Night"; New Casebooks*: 146-47.

[^5]: Harold Jenkins, "Shakespeare's *Twelfth Night*," in "*Twelfth
    Night": Critical Essays*: 178-80.

[^6]: Christina Malcolmson, "Social Mobility and Gender in *Twelfth
    Night*," in *"Twelfth Night"; New Casebooks*: 171; Barbara Everett:
    198.

[^7]: Harold Jenkins: 187.

[^8]: For the Platonic view see: Leo Strauss, *The City and the Man*
    (Chicago: Rand McNally and Co., 1964): 109-15; Leo Strauss, "Plato,"
    in *History of Political Philosophy*, ed. Leo Strauss and Joseph
    Cropsey, 2^nd^ ed. (Chicago: Rand McNally College Publishing Co.,
    1963): 24.

[^9]: For the view that attachment is a behavioural system with its own
    imperatives, which are as powerful as those of sex or
    self-preservation, see John Bowlby, *A Secure Base: Clinical
    Applications of Attachment Theory* (London: Routledge, 1998): 26.

[^10]: Leslie Hotson, "Illyria for Whitehall," in "*Twelfth Night":
    Critical Essays*: 89

[^11]: This is of course close to Plato's view: Leo Strauss, "Plato" in
    *History of Political Philosophy*: 21.

[^12]: J. B. Priestley, "The Illyrians," in "*Twelfth Night": Critical
    Essays*: 4.

[^13]: Elliot Krieger, "*Twelfth Night*, 'The morality of indulgence,'"
    in *"Twelfth Night"; New Casebooks*: 42.

[^14]: For Shakespeare's indirect allusions to Catholicism see: Paul
    Dean, "'Nothing That is So is So': "Twelfth Night" and
    Transubstantiation," in *Literature and Theology* 17 (2003): 281-97;
    Maurice Hunt, *Shakespeare's Religious Allusiveness: Its Play and
    Tolerance* (Burlington: Ashgate, 2004): 105.

[^15]: A. S. Leggatt: 235

[^16]: See Leo Strauss, *Socrates and Aristophanes* (New York: Basic
    Bks., 1966): 6.

[^17]: A. C. Bradley, "Feste the Jester," in "*Twelfth Night": Critical
    Essays*: 20; Barbara Everett: 208.

[^18]: Michael D. Bristol, *Carnival and Theater: Plebeian Culture and
    the Structure of Authority in Renaissance England* (London: Methuen,
    1985): 126.

[^19]: Elliot Krieger: 38
